14. Ta Yu / Possession in Great Measure



 above LI THE CLINGING, FLAME  
below CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN



 The fire in heaven above shines far, and all things stand out in the light
and become manifest. The weak fifth line occupies the place of honor and all
the strong lines are in accord with it.All things come to the man who is
modest and kind in a high position.



 THE JUDGMENT



 POSSESSION IN GREAT MEASURE.



 Supreme success.



 The two trigrams indicate that strength and clarity unite. Possessions great
measure is determined by fate and accords with the time. How is it possible
that the weak line has power to hold the strong lines fast and to possess
them? It is done by virtue of unselfish modesty. The time is favorable--a time
of strength within, clarity and culture without. Power is expressing itself in
graceful and controlled way. This brings supreme success and wealth.



 THE IMAGE



 Fire in heaven above:



 The image of POSSESSION IN GREAT MEASURE.  
Thus the superior man curbs evil and furthers good,  
And thereby obeys the benevolent will of heaven.



 The sun in heaven above, shedding light over everything one earth, is the
image of possession on a grand scale. But a possession of this sort must be
administered properly. The sun brings both evil and good into the light of
day. Man must combat and curb the evil, and must favor and promote the good.
Only in this way does he fulfill the benevolent will of God, who desires only
good and not evil.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 No relationship with what is harmful;  
There is no blame in this.  
If one remains conscious of difficulty,  
One remains without blame.



 Great possession that is still in its beginnings and that has not yet been
challenged brings no blame, since there has been no opportunity to make
mistakes. Yet there are many difficulties to be overcome. It is only by
remaining conscious of theses difficulties that one can keep inwardly free of
possible arrogance and wastefulness, and thus in principle overcome all cause
for blame.



 Nine in the second place means:



 A big wagon for loading.  
One may undertake something.  
No blame.



 Great possession consists not only in the quantity of goods at one's
disposal, but first and foremost, in their mobility and utility, for then they
can be used in undertakings, and we remain free of embarrassment and mistakes.
The big wagon, which will carry a heavy load and in which one can journey farm
means that there are at hand able helpers who give their support t and are
equal to their task. One can load great responsibility upon such persons, and
this is necessary in important undertakings.



 Nine in the third place means:



 A prince offers it to the Son of Heaven.  
A petty man cannot do this.



 A magnanimous, liberal-minded man should not regard what he possesses as his
exclusive personal property , but should place it at the disposal of the ruler
or of the people at large. In so doing, he takes the right attitude toward his
possession, which as private property can never endure. A petty man is
incapable of this. He is harmed by great possessions, because instead of
sacrificing them, he would keep them for himself.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 He makes a difference  
Between himself and his neighbor.  
No blame.



 This characterizes the position of a man placed among rich and powerful
neighbors. It is a dangerous position. He must look neither to the right nor
to the left, and must shun envy and the temptation to vie with others. In this
way he remains free of mistakes.



 Six in the fifth place means:



 He whose truth is accessible, yet dignified,  
Has good fortune.



 The situation is very favorable. People are being won not by coercion but by
unaffected sincerity, so that they are attached to us in sincerity and truth.
However, benevolence alone is not sufficient at the time of POSSESSION IN
GREAT MEASURE. For insolence might begin to spread. Insolence must be kept in
bounds by dignity; then good fortune is assured.



 Nine at the top means:



 He is blessed by heaven.  
Good fortune.  
Nothing that does not further.



 In the fullness of possession and at the height of power, one remains modest
and gives honor to the sage who stands outside the affairs of the world. By
this means one puts oneself under the beneficent influence descending form
heaven, and all goes well. Confucius says of this line:



 To bless means to help. Heaven helps the man who is devoted; men help the
man who is true. He who walks in truth and is devoted in his thinking, and
furthermore reveres the worthy, is blessed by heaven. He has good fortune, and
there is nothing that would not further.






  
