10. Lu / Treading [conduct]



 above CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN  
below TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE



 The name of the hexagram means on the one hand the right way of conducting
oneself. Heaven, the father, is above, and the lake, the youngest daughter, is
below. This shows the difference between high and low, upon which composure
correct social conduct, depends. On the other hand the word for the name of
the hexagram, TREADING, means literally treading upon something. The small and
cheerful [Tui] treads upon the large and strong [Ch'ien]. The direction of
movement of the two primary trigrams is upward. The fact that the strong
treads on the weak is not mentioned in the Book of Changes, because it is
taken for granted. For the weak to take a stand against the strong is not
dangerous here, because it happened in good humor [Tui] and without
presumption, so that the strong man is not irritated but takes it all in good
part.



 THE JUDGMENT



 TREADING. Treading upon the tail of the tiger.  
It does not bite the man. Success.



 The situation is really difficult. That which is strongest and that which is
weakest are close together. The weak follows behind the strong and worries it.
The strong, however, acquiesces and does not hurt the weak, because the
contact is in goof humor and harmless. In terms of a human situation, one is
handling wild, intractable people. In such a case one's purpose will be
achieved if one behaves with decorum. Pleasant manners succeed even with
irritable people.



 THE IMAGE



 Heaven above, the lake below:  
The image of TREADING.



 Thus the superior man discriminates between high and low,  
And thereby fortifies the thinking of the people.



 Heaven and the lake show a difference of elevation that inheres in the
natures of the two, hence no envy arises. Among mankind also there are
necessarily differences of elevation; it is impossible to bring about
universal equality. But it is important that differences in social rank should
not be arbitrary and unjust, for if this occurs, envy and class struggle are
the inevitable consequences. If, on the other hand, external differences in
rank correspond with differences in inner worth, and if inner worth forms the
criterion of external rank, people acquiesce and order reigns in society.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Simple conduct. Progress without blame.



 The situation is one in which we are still not bound by any obligations of
social intercourse. If our conduct is simple, we remain free of them We can
quietly follow our predilections as long as we are content and make not
demands on people. The meaning of the hexagram is not standstill but progress.
A man finds himself in an altogether inferior position at the start. However,
he has the inner strength that guarantees progress. If he can be content with
simplicity, he can make progress without blame. When a man is dissatisfied
with modest circumstances, he is restless and ambitious and tries to advance,
not for the sake of accomplishing anything worth while, but merely in order to
escape from lowliness and poverty by dint of his conduct. Once his purpose is
achieved, he is certain to become arrogant and luxury-loving. Therefore blame
attaches to his progress. On the other hand, a man who is good at his work is
content to behave simply. He wishes to make progress in order to accomplish
something. When he attains his goal, he does something worth while, an all is
well.



 Nine in the second place means:



 Treading a smooth, level course.  
The perseverance of a dark man  
Brings good fortune.



 The situation of a lonely sage is indicated here. He remains withdrawn from
the bustle of life, seeks nothing, asks nothing of anyone, and travels through
life unassailed, on a level road. Since he is content and does not challenge
fate, he remains free of entanglements.



 Six in the third place means:



 A one-eyed man is able to see,  
A lame man is able to tread.  
He treads on the tail of the tiger.



 The tiger bites the man.  
Misfortune.



 Thus does a warrior act on behalf of his great prince.



 A one-eyed man can indeed see, but not enough for clear vision. A lame man
can indeed treat, but not enough to make progress. If in spite of such defects
a man considers himself strong and consequently exposes himself to danger, he
is inviting disaster, for he is undertaking something beyond his strength.
This reckless way of plunging ahead, regardless of the adequacy of one's
powers, can be justified only in the case of a warrior battling for his
prince.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 He treads on the tail of the tiger.  
Caution and circumspection  
Lead ultimately to good fortune.



 This text refers to a dangerous enterprise. The inner power to carry it
through is there, but this inner power is combined with hesitating caution in
one's external attitude. This line contrasts with the preceding line, which is
weak within but outwardly presses forward. Here one is sure of ultimate
success, which consists in achieving one's purpose, that is, in overcoming
danger by going forward.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Resolute conduct.  
Perseverance with awareness of danger.



 This refers to the ruler of the hexagram as a whole. One sees that one has
to be resolute in conduct. But at the same time one must remain conscious of
the danger connected with such resoluteness, especially if it is to be
persevered in. Only awareness of the danger makes success possible.



 Nine at the top means:



 Look to your conduct and weigh the favorable signs.  
When everything is fulfilled, supreme good fortune comes.



 The work is ended. If we want to know whether good fortune will follow, we
must look back upon our conduct and its consequences. If the effects are good,
then good fortune is certain. No one knows himself. It is only by the
consequences of his actions, by the fruit of his labors, that a man can judge
what he is to expect.






  
