12. P'i / Standstill [Stagnation]



 above CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN  
below K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH



 This hexagram is the opposite of the preceding one. Heaven is above, drawing
farther and farther away, while the earth below sinks farther into the depths.
The creative powers are not in relation. It is a time of standstill and
decline. This hexagram is linked with the seventh month (August-September),
when the year has passed its zenith and autumnal decay is setting in.



 THE JUDGMENT



 STANDSTILL. Evil people do not further  
The perseverance of the superior man.  
The great departs; the small approaches.



 Heaven and earth are out of communion and all things are benumbed. What is
above has no relation to what is below, and on earth confusion and disorder
prevail. The dark power is within, the light power is without. Weakness is
within, harshness without. Within are the inferior, and without are the
superior. The way of inferior people is in ascent; the way of superior people
is one the decline. But the superior people do not allow themselves to be
turned from their principles. If the possibility of exerting influence is
closed to them, they nevertheless remain faithful to their principles and
withdraw into seclusion.



 THE IMAGE



 Heaven and earth do not unite:  
The image of STANDSTILL.  
Thus the superior man falls back upon his inner worth  
In order to escape the difficulties.  
He does not permit himself to be honored with revenue.



 When, owing to the influence of inferior men, mutual mistrust prevails in
public life, fruitful activity is rendered impossible, because the fundaments
are wrong. Therefore the superior man knows what he must do under such
circumstances; he does not allow himself to be tempted by dazzling offers to
take part in public activities. This would only expose him to danger, since he
cannot assent to the meanness of the others. He therefore hides his worth and
withdraws into seclusion.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 When ribbon grass is pulled up, the sod comes with it.  
Each according to his kind.  
Perseverance brings good fortune and success.



 The text is almost the same as that of the first line of the preceding
hexagram, but with a contrary meaning. In the latter a man is drawing another
along with him on the road to an official career; here a man is drawing
another with him into retirement form public life. This is why the text says
here, "Perseverance brings good fortune and success," and not "Undertakings
bring good fortune." If it becomes impossible to make our influence count, it
is only by retirement that we spare ourselves humiliation. Success in a higher
sense can be ours, because we know how to safeguard the value of our
personalities.



 Six in the second place means:



 They bear and endure;  
This means good fortune for inferior people.  
The standstill serves to help the great man to attain success.



 Inferior people are ready to flatter their superiors in a servile way. They
would also endure the superior man if he would put an end to their confusion.
This is fortunate for them. But the great man calmly bears the consequences of
the standstill. He does not mingle with the crowd of the inferior; that is not
his place. By his willingness to suffer personally he insures the success of
his fundamental principles.



 Six in the third place means:



 They bear shame.



 Inferior people who have risen to power illegitimately do not feel equal to
the responsibility they have taken upon themselves. In their hearts they begin
to be ashamed, although at first they do not show it outwardly. This marks a
turn for the better.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 He who acts at the command of the highest  
Remains without blame.  
Those of like mind partake of the blessing.



 The time of standstill is nearing the point of change into its opposite.
Whoever wishes to restore order must feel himself called to the task and have
the necessary authority. A man who sets himself up a capable of creating order
according to his own judgment could make mistakes and end in failure. But the
man who is truly called to the task is favored by the conditions of the time,
and all those of like mind will share in his blessing.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Standstill is giving way.  
Good fortune for the great man.  
"What if it should fail, what if it should fail?"  
In this way he ties it to a cluster of mulberry shoots.



 The time undergoes a change. The right man, able to restore order, has
arrived. Hence "good fortune." But such periods of transition are the very
times in which we must fear and tremble. Success is assured only through
greatest caution, which asks always, "What if it should fail?" When a mulberry
bush is cut down, a number of unusually strong shoots sprout from the roots.
Hence the image of tying something to a cluster of mulberry shoots is used to
symbolize the way of making success certain. Confucius says about this line:



 Danger arises when a man feels secure in his position. Destruction threatens
when a man seeks to preserve his worldly estate. Confusion develops when a man
has put everything in order. Therefore the superior man does not forget danger
in his security, not ruin when he is well established, nor confusion when his
affairs are in order. In this way he gains personal safety and is able to
protect the empire.



 Nine at the top means:



 The standstill comes to an end.  
First standstill, then good fortune.



 The standstill does not last forever. However, it does not cease of its own
accord; the right man is needed to end it. This is the difference between a
state of peace and a state of stagnation. Continuous effort is necessary to
maintain peace: left to itself it would change into stagnation and
disintegration. The time of disintegration, however, does not change back
automatically to a condition of peace and prosperity; effort must be put forth
in order to end it. This shows the creative attitude that man must take if the
world is to be put in order.






  
