19. Lin / Approach



 above K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH  
below TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE



 The Chinese word lin has a range of meanings that is not exhausted by any
single word of another language. The ancient explanations in the Book of
Changes give as its first meaning, "becoming great." What becomes great are
the two strong lines growing into the hexagram from below; the light-giving
power expands with them. The meaning is then further extended to include the
concept of approach, especially the approach of what is lower. Finally the
meaning includes the attitude of condescension of a man in high position
toward the people, and in general the setting to work on affairs. This
hexagram is linked with the twelfth month (January-February), when after the
winter solstice, the light power begins to ascend again.



 THE JUDGMENT



 APPROACH has supreme success.  
Perseverance furthers.  
When the eighth month comes,



 . There will be misfortune.



 The hexagram as a whole points to a time of joyous, hopeful progress. Spring
is approaching. Joy and forbearance bring high and low nearer together.
Success is certain. But we must work with determination and perseverance to
make full use of the propitiousness of the time. And on thing more: spring
does not last forever. In the eighth month the aspects are reversed. Then only
two strong, light lines are left; these do not advance but are in retreat (see
next hexagram). We must take heed of this change in good time. If we meet evil
before it becomes reality-before it has even begun to stir-we can master it.



 THE IMAGE



 The earth above the lake:  
The image of APPROACH.  
Thus the superior man is inexhaustible  
In his will to teach,  
And without limits  
In his tolerance and protection of the people.



 The earth borders upon the lake from above. This symbolizes the approach and
condescension of the man of higher position to those beneath him. The two
parts of the image indicate what his attitude toward these people will be.
Just as the lake is inexhaustible in depth, so the sage is inexhaustible in
his readiness to teach mankind, and just as the earth is boundlessly wide,
sustaining and caring for all creatures on it, so the sage sustains and cares
for all people and excludes no part of humanity.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Joint approach.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 The good begins to prevail and to find response in influential circles. This
in turn is an incentive to men of ability. IT is well to join this upward
trend, but we must not let ourselves be carried away by the current of the
time; we must adhere perseveringly to what is right. This bring good fortune.  
Nine in the second place means:



 Joint approach.  
Good fortune.  
Everything furthers.



 When the stimulus to approach comes from a high place, and when a man has
the inner strength and consistency that need no admonition, good fortune will
ensue. Nor need the future cause any concern. He is well aware that everything
earthly is transitory, and that a descent follows upon every rise, but need
not be confused by this universal law of fate. Everything serves to further.
Therefore he will travel the paths of life swiftly, honestly, and valiantly.



 Six in the third place means:



 Comfortable approach.  
Nothing that would further.  
If one is induced to grieve over it,  
One becomes free of blame.



 Things are going well for a man: he achieves power and influence. But in
this lies the danger that he may relax, and confident of his position, allow
the easygoing, careless mood to show itself in his dealings with other people.
This would inevitably be harmful. But there is possibility of a change of
mood. If he regrets his mistaken attitude and feels the responsibility of an
influential position, he frees himself of faults.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Complete approach.  
No blame.  



 While the three lower lines indicate rise to power and influence, the three
upper lines show the attitude of persons in higher position toward those of
lower rank for whom they procure influence. Here is shown the open-minded
approach of a person of high rank to a man of ability whom he draws in to his
own circle, regardless of class prejudice. This is very favorable.



 Six in the fifth place means:



 Wise approach.  
This is right for a great prince.  
Good fortune.



 A prince, or anyone in a leading position, must have the wisdom to attract
to himself people of ability who are expert in directing affairs. His wisdom
consists both in selecting the right people and in allowing those chosen to
have a free hand without interference from him. For only through such self-
restraint will he find the experts needed to satisfy all of his requirements.



 Six at the top means:



 Great hearted approach.  
Good-hearted approach.  
Good fortune. No blame.



 A sage who has put the world behind him and who in spirit has already
withdrawn from life may, under certain circumstances, decide to return once
more to the here and now and to approach other men. This means great good
fortune for the men whom he teaches and helps. And for him this great hearted
humbling of himself is blameless.






  
