23. Po / Splitting Apart



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 The dark lines are about to mount upward and overthrow the last firm, light
line by exerting a disintegrating influence on it. The inferior, dark forces
overcome what is superior and strong, not by direct means, but by undermining
it gradually and imperceptibly, so that it finally collapses. The lines of the
hexagram present the image of a house, the top line being the roof, and
because the roof is being shattered the house collapses. The hexagram belongs
to the ninth month (October-November). The yin power pushes up ever more
powerfully and is about to supplant the yang power altogether.



 THE JUDGMENT



 SPLITTING APART. IT does not further one  
To go anywhere.



 This pictures a time when inferior people are pushing forward and are about
to crowd out the few remaining strong and superior men. Under these
circumstances, which are due to the time, it is not favorable for the superior
man to undertake anything. The right behavior in such adverse times is to be
deduced from the images and their attributes. The lower trigram stands for the
earth, whose attributes. The lower trigram stands for the earth, whose
attributes are docility and devotion. The upper trigram stands for the
mountain, whose attribute is stillness. This suggests that one should submit
to the bad time and remain quiet. For it is a question not of man's doing but
of time conditions, which, according to the laws of heaven, show an
alternation of increase and decrease, fullness and emptiness. It is impossible
to counteract these conditions of the time. Hence it is not cowardice but
wisdom to submit and avoid action.



 THE IMAGE



 The mountain rests on the earth:  
The image of SPLITTING APART.  
Thus those above can ensure their position  
Only by giving generously to those below.



 The mountain rests on the earth. When it is steep and narrow, lacking a
broad base, it must topple over. Its position is strong only when it rises out
of the earth broad and great, not proud and steep. So likewise those who rule
rest on the broad foundation of the people. They too should be generous and
benevolent, like the earth that carries all. Then they will make their
position as secure as a mountain is in its tranquillity.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 The leg of the bed is split.  
Those who persevere are destroyed.  
Misfortune.



 Inferior people are on the rise and stealthily begin their destructive
burrowing from below in order to undermine the place where the superior man
rests. Those followers of the ruler who remain loyal are destroyed by slander
and intrigue. The situation bodes disaster, yet there is nothing to do but
wait.



 Six in the second place means:



 The bed is split at the edge.  
Those who persevere are destroyed.  
Misfortune.



 The power of the inferior people is growing. The danger draws close to one's
person; already there are clear indication, and rest is disturbed. Moreover,
in this dangerous situation one is as yet without help or friendly advances
from above or below. Extreme caution is necessary in this isolation. One must
adjust to the time and promptly avoid the danger. Stubborn perseverance in
maintaining one's standpoint would lead to downfall.



 Six in the third place means:



 He splits with them. No blame.



 An individual finds himself in an evil environment to which he is committed
by external ties. But he has an inner relationship with a superior man, and
through this he attains the stability to free himself from the way of the
inferior people around him. This brings him into opposition to them of course,
but that is not wrong.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 The bed is split up to the skin.  
Misfortune.



 Here the disaster affects not only the resting place but even the occupant.
No warning or other comment is added. Misfortune has reached its peak: it can
no longer be warded off.



 Six in the fifth place means:



 A shoal of fishes. Favor comes through the court ladies.  
Everything acts to further.



 Here, in immediate proximity to the strong, light-giving principle at the
top, the nature of the dark force undergoes a change. It no longer opposes the
strong principle by means of intrigues but submits to its guidance. Indeed, as
the head of the other weak lines, it leads all of these to the strong line,
just as a princess leads her maids-in-waiting like a shoal of fishes to her
husband and thus gains his favor. Inasmuch as the lower element thus
voluntarily places itself under the higher, it attains happiness and the
higher also receives its due. Therefore all goes well.  
Nine at the top means:



 There is a large fruit still uneaten.  
The superior man receives a carriage.  
The house of the inferior man is split apart.



 Here the splitting apart reaches its end. When misfortune has spent itself,
better times return. The seed of the good remains, and it is just when the
fruit falls to the ground that food sprouts anew from its seed. The superior
man again attains influence and effectiveness. He is supported by public
opinion as if in a carriage. But the inferior man's wickedness is visited upon
himself. His house is split apart. A law of nature is at work here. Evil is
not destructive to the good alone but inevitably destroys itself as well. For
evil, which lives solely by negation, cannot continue to exist on its own
strength alone. The inferior man himself fares best when held under control by
a superior man.






  
