26. Ta Ch'u / The Taming Power of the Great



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN



 The Creative is tamed by Ken, Keeping Still. This produces great power, a
situation in contrast to that of the ninth hexagram, Hsiao Ch'u, THE TAMING
POWER OF THE SMALL, in which the Creative is tamed by the Gentle alone. There
one weak line must tame five strong lines, but here four strong lines are
restrained by two weak lines; in addition to a minister, there is a prince,
and the restraining power therefore is afar stronger. The hexagram has a
threefold meaning, expressing different aspects of the concept "Holding firm."
Heaven within the mountain gives the idea of holding firm in the sense of
holding together; the trigram Ken which holds the trigram ch'ien still, gives
the idea of holding firm in the sense of holding back; the third idea is that
of holding firm in the sense of caring for and nourishing. This last is
suggested by the fact that a strong line at the top, which is the ruler of the
hexagram, is honored and tended as a sage. The third of these meanings also
attaches specifically to this strong line at the top, which represents the
sage.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE TAMING POWER OF THE GREAT.  
Perseverance furthers.



 Not eating at home brings good fortune.  
It furthers one to cross the great water.



 To hold firmly to great creative powers and store them up, as set forth in
this hexagram, there is need of a strong, clear-headed man who is honored by
the ruler. The trigram Ch'ein points to strong creative power; Ken indicates
firmness and truth. Both point to light and clarity and to the daily renewal
of character. Only through such daily self-renewal can a man continue at the
height of his powers. Force of habit helps to keep order in quiet times; but
in periods when there is a great storing up of energy, everything depends on
the power of the personality. However, since the worthy are honored, as in the
case of the strong personality entrusted with leadership by the ruler, it is
an advantage not to eat at home but rather to earn one's bread by entering
upon public office. Such a man is in harmony with heaven; therefore even great
and difficult undertakings, such as crossing the great water, succeed.



 THE IMAGE



 Heaven within the mountain:



 The image of THE TAMING POWER OF THE GREAT.



 Thus the superior man acquaints himself with many sayings of antiquity  
And many deeds of the past,  
In order to strengthen his character thereby.



 Heaven within the mountain points to hidden treasures. In the words and
deeds of the past there lies hidden a treasure that men may use to strengthen
and elevate their own characters. The way to study the past is not to confine
oneself to mere knowledge of history but, through application of this
knowledge, to give actuality to the past.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Danger is at hand. It furthers one to desist.



 A man wishes to make vigorous advance, but circumstances present an
obstacle. He sees himself held back firmly. If he should attempt to fore an
advance, it would lead him into misfortune. Therefore it is better for him to
compose himself and to wait until an outlet is offered for release of his
stored-up energies.



 Nine in the second place means:



 The axletrees are taken from the wagon.



 Here advance is checked just as in the third line of THE TAMING POWER OF THE
SMALL



 9. However, in the later the restraining force is slight; thus a conflict
arises between the propulsive and the restraining movement, as a result of
which the spokes fall out of the wagon wheels, while here the restraining
force is absolutely superior; hence no struggle takes place. One submits and
removes the axletrees from the wagon -in other words, contents himself with
waiting. In this way energy accumulates for a vigorous advance later on.



 Nine in the third place means.  
A good horse that follows others.  
Awareness of danger,  
With perseverance, furthers.  
Practice chariot driving and armed defense daily.  
It furthers one to have somewhere to go.



 The way opens; the hindrance has been cleared away. A man is in contact with
a strong will acting in the same direction as his own, and goes forward like
one good horse following another. But danger still threatens, and he must
remain aware of it, or he will be robbed of his firmness. Thus he must acquire
skill on the one hand in what will take him forward, and on the other in what
will protect him against unforeseen attacks. It is good in such a pass to have
a goal toward which to strive.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 The headboard of a young bull.  
Great good fortune.



 This line and the one following it are the two that tame the forward-pushing
lower lines. Before a bull's horns grow out, a headboard is fastened to its
forehead, so that later when the horns appear they cannot do harm. A good way
to restrain wild force is to forestall it. By so doing one achieves an easy
and great success.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 The tusk of a gelded boar.  
Good fortune.



 Here the restraining of the impetuous forward drive is achieved in an
indirect way. A boar's tusk is in itself dangerous, but if the boar's nature
is altered, the tusk is no longer a menace. Thus also where men are concerned,
wild force should not be combated directly; instead, its roots should be
eradicated.  
Nine at the top means:



 One attains the way of heaven.



 Success.



 The time of obstruction is past. The energy long dammed up by inhibition
forces its way out and achieves great success. This refers to a man who is
honored by the ruler and whose principles now prevail and shape the world.






  
