22. Pi / Grace



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 This hexagram shows a fire that breaks out of the secret depths of the earth
and, blazing up, illuminates and beautifies the mountain, the heavenly
heights. Grace-beauty of form-is necessary in any union if it is to be well
ordered and pleasing rather than disordered and chaotic.



 THE JUDGMENT



 GRACE has success.  
In small matters  
It is favorable to undertake something.



 Grace brings success. However, it is not the essential or fundamental thing;
it is only the ornament and therefore be used sparingly and only in little
things. In the lower trigram of fire a yielding line comes between two strong
lines and makes them beautiful, but the strong lines are the essential content
and the weak line is the beautifying form. In the upper trigram of the
mountain, the strong line takes the lead, so that here again the strong
element must be regarded as the decisive factor. In nature we see in the sky
the strong light of the sun; the life of the world depends on it. But this
strong, essential thing is changed and given pleasing variety by the moon and
the stars. In human affairs, aesthetic form comes into being when traditions
exist that, strong and abiding like mountains, are made pleasing by a lucid
beauty. By contemplating the forms existing in the heavens we come to
understand time and its changing demands. Through contemplation of the forms
existing in human society it becomes possible to shape the world.



 THE IMAGE



 Fire at the foot of the mountain:



 The image of GRACE.  
Thus does the superior man proceed  
When clearing up current affairs.  
But he dare not decide controversial issues in this way.



 The fire, whose light illuminates the mountain and makes it pleasing, does
not shine far; in the same way, beautiful form suffices to brighten and to
throw light upon matters of lesser moment, but important questions cannot be
decided in this way. They require greater earnestness.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 He lends grace to his toes, leaves the carriage, and walks.



 A beginner in subordinate place must take upon himself the labor of
advancing. There might be an opportunity of surreptitiously easing the way-
symbolized by the carriage-but a self-contained man scorns help gained in a
dubious fashion. He thinks it more graceful to go on foot than to drive in a
carriage under false pretenses.  
Six in the second place means:



 Lends grace to the beard on his chin.



 The beard is not an independent thing; it moves only with the chin. The
image therefore means that form is to be considered only as a result and
attribute of content. The beard is a superfluous ornament. To devote care to
it for its own sake, without regard for the inner content of which it is an
ornament, would bespeak a certain vanity.



 Nine in the third place means:



 Graceful and moist.  
Constant perseverance brings good fortune.



 This represents a very charming life situation. One is under the spell of
grace and the mellow mood induced by wine. This grace can adorn, but it can
also swamp us. Hence the warning not to sink into convivial indolence but to
remain constant in perseverance. Good fortune depends on this.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Grace or simplicity?  
A white horse comes as if on wings.  
He is not a robber,  
He will woo at the right time.



 An individual is in a situation in which doubts arise as to which is better-
to pursue the grace of external brilliance, or to return to simplicity. The
doubt itself implies the answer. Confirmation comes from the outside; it comes
like a white winged horse. The white color indicates simplicity. At first it
may be disappointing to renounce the comforts that might have been obtained,
yet one finds peace of mind in a true relationship with the friend who courts
him. The winged horse is the symbol of the thoughts that transcend all limits
of space and time.



 Six in the fifth place means:



 Grace in the hills and gardens.  
The roll of silk is meager and small.  
Humiliation, but in the end good fortune.



 A man withdraws from contact with people of the lowlands, who seek nothing
but magnificence and luxury, in to the solitude of the heights. There he finds
an individual to look up to, whom he would like to have as a friend. But the
gifts he has to offer are poor and few, so that he feels ashamed. However, it
is not the material gifts that count, but sincerity of feeling, and so all
goes well in the end.  
Nine at the top means:



 Simple grace. No blame.



 Here at the highest stage of development all ornament is discarded. Form no
longer conceals content but brings out its value to the full. Perfect grace
consists not in exterior ornamentation of the substance, but in the simple
fitness of its form.






  
