30. Li / The Clinging, Fire



 above LI THE CLINGING, FIRE  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 This hexagram is another double sign. The trigram Li means "to cling to
something," and also "brightness." A dark line clings to two light lines, one
above and one below--the image of an empty space between two strong lines,
whereby the two strong lines are made bright. The trigram represents the
middle daughter. The Creative has incorporated the central line of the
Receptive, and thus Li develops. As an image, it is fire. Fire has no definite
form but clings to the burning object and thus is bright. As water pours down
from heaven, so fire flames up from the earth. While K'an means the soul shut
within the body, Li stands for nature in its radiance.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE CLINGING. Perseverance furthers.  
It brings success.  
Care of the cow brings good fortune.



 What is dark clings to what is light and so enhances the brightness of the
latter. A luminous thing giving out light must have within itself something
that perseveres; otherwise it will in time burn itself out. Everything that
gives light is dependent on something to which it clings, in order that it may
continue to shine. Thus the sun and moon cling to heaven, and grain, grass,
and trees cling to the earth. So too the twofold clarity of the dedicated man
clings to what is right and thereby can shape the world. Human life on earth
is conditioned and unfree, and when man recognizes this limitation and makes
himself dependent upon the harmonious and beneficent forces of the cosmos, he
achieves success. The cow is the symbol of extreme docility. By cultivating in
himself an attitude of compliance and voluntary dependence, man acquires
clarity without sharpness and finds his place in the world.



 THE IMAGE



 That which is bright rises twice:



 The image of FIRE.



 Thus the great man, by perpetuating this brightness,  
Illumines the four quarters of the world.



 Each of the two trigrams represents the sun in the course of a day. The two
together represent the repeated movement of the sun, the function of light
with respect to time. The great man continues the work of nature in the human
world. Through the clarity of his nature he causes the light to spread farther
and farther and to penetrate the nature of man ever more deeply.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 The footprints run crisscross.  
If one is seriously intent, no blame.



 It is early morning and work begins. The mind has been closed to the outside
world in sleep; now its connections with the world begin again. The traces of
one's impressions run crisscross. Activity and haste prevail. It is important
then to preserve inner composure and not to allow oneself to be swept along by
the bustle of life. If one is serious and composed, he can acquire the clarity
of mind needed for coming to terms with the innumerable impressions that pour
in. It is precisely at the beginning that serious concentration is important,
because the beginning holds the seed of all that is to follow.  
Six in the second place means:



 Yellow light. Supreme good fortune.



 Midday has come; the sun shines with a yellow light. Yellow is the color of
measure and mean. Yellow light is therefore a symbol of the highest culture
and art, whose consummate harmony consists in holding to the mean.



 Nine in the third place means:



 In the light of the setting sun,  
Men either beat the pot and sing  
Or loudly bewail the approach of old age.  
Misfortune.



 Here the end of the day has come. The light of the setting sun calls to mind
the fact that life is transitory and conditional. Caught in this external
bondage, men are usually robbed of their inner freedom as well. The sense of
the transitoriness of life impels them to uninhibited revelry in order to
enjoy life while it lasts, or else they yield to melancholy and spoil the
precious time by lamenting the approach of old age. Both attitudes are wrong.
To the superior man it makes no difference whether death comes early or late.
He cultivates himself, awaits his allotted time, and in this way secures his
fate.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 Its coming is sudden;  
It flames up, dies down, is thrown away.



 Clarity of mind has the same relation to life that fire has to wood. Fire
clings to wood, but also consumes it. Clarity of mind is rooted in life but
can also consume it. Everything depends upon how the clarity functions. Here
the image used is that of a meteor or a straw fire. A man who is excitable and
restless may rise quickly to prominence but produces no lasting effects. Thus
matters end badly when a man spends himself too rapidly and consumes himself
like a meteor.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Tears in floods, sighing and lamenting.  
Good fortune.



 Here the zenith of life has been reached. Were there no warning, one would
at this point consume oneself like a flame. Instead, understanding the vanity
of all things, one may put aside both hope and fear, and sigh and lament: if
one is intent on retaining his clarity of mind, good fortune will come from
this grief. For here we are dealing not with a passing mood, as in the nine in
the third place, but with a real change of heart.



 Nine at the top means:



 The king used him to march forth and chastise.



 Then it is best to kill the leaders  
And take captive the followers. No blame.



 It is not the purpose of chastisement to impose punishment blindly but to
create discipline. Evil must be cured at its roots. To eradicate evil in
political life, it is best to kill the ringleaders and spare the followers. In
educating oneself it is best to root out bad habits and tolerate those that
are harmless. For asceticism that is too strict, like sentences of undue
severity, fails in its purpose.






  
