35. Chin / Progress



 above LI THE CLINGING, FIRE  
below K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH



 The hexagram represents the sun rising over the earth. It is therefore the
symbol of rapid, easy progress, which at the same time means ever widening
expansion and clarity.



 THE JUDGMENT



 PROGRESS. The powerful prince  
Is honored with horses in large numbers.  
In a single day he is granted audience three times.



 As an example of progress, this pictures a time when a powerful feudal lord
rallies the other lords around the sovereign and pledges fealty and peace. The
sovereign rewards him richly and invites him to a closer intimacy.



 A twofold idea is set forth here. The actual effect of the progress emanates
from a man who is in a dependent position and whom the others regard as their
equal and are therefore willing to follow. This leader has enough clarity of
vision not to abuse his great influence but to use it rather for the benefit
of his ruler. His ruler in turn is free of all jealousy, showers presents on
the great man, and invites him continually to his court. An enlightened ruler
and an obedient servant--this is the condition on which great progress
depends.



 THE IMAGE



 The sun rises over the earth:



 The image of PROGRESS.



 Thus the superior man himself  
Brightens his bright virtue.



 The light of the sun rises over the earth is by nature clear. The higher the
sun rises, the more it emerges from the dark mists, spreading the pristine
purity of its rays over an ever widening area. The real nature of man is
likewise originally good, but it becomes clouded by contact with earthly
things and therefore needs purification before it can shine forth in its
native clarity.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Progressing, but turned back.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.  
If one meets with no confidence, one should remain calm.



 No mistake.



 At a time when all elements are pressing for progress, we are still
uncertain whether in the course of advance we may not meet with a rebuff. Then
the thing to do is simply continue in what is right; in the end this will
bring good fortune. It may be that we meet with no confidence. In this case we
ought not to try to win confidence regardless of the situation, but should
remain calm and cheerful and refuse to be roused to anger. Thus we remain free
of mistakes.



 Six in the second place means:



 Progressing, but in sorrow.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 Then one obtains great happiness from one's ancestress.



 Progress is halted; an individual is kept from getting in touch with the man
in authority with whom he has a connection. When this happens, he must remain
persevering, although he is grieved; then with a maternal gentleness the man
in question will bestow great happiness upon him. This happiness comes to him-
and is well deserved-because in this case mutual attraction does not rest on
selfish or partisan motives but on firm and correct principles.



 Six in the third place means:



 All are in accord. Remorse disappears.



 A man strives onward, in association with others whose backing encourages
him. This dispels any cause for regret over the fact that he does not have
enough independence to triumph unaided over every hostile turn of fate.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 Progress like a hamster.  
Perseverance brings danger.



 In times of progress it is easy for strong men in the wrong places to amass
great possessions. But such conduct shuns the light. And since times of
progress are inevitably brought to the light, perseverance in such action
always leads to danger.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Remorse disappears.



 Take not gain and loss to heart.  
Undertakings bring good fortune.  
Everything serves to further.



 The situation described here is that of one who, finding himself in an
influential position in a time of progress, remains gentle and reserved. He
might reproach himself for lack of energy in making the most of the
propitiousness of the time and obtaining all possible advantage. However, this
regret passes away. He must not take either loss or gain to heart; they are
minor considerations. What matters much more is the fact that in this way he
has assured himself of opportunities for successful and beneficent influence.



 Nine at the top means:



 Making progress with the horns is permissible  
Only for the purpose of punishing one's own city.



 To be conscious of danger brings good fortune.



 No blame.  
Perseverance brings humiliation.



 Making progress with lowered horns-i.e., acting on the offensive-is
permissible, in times like those referred to here, only in dealing with the
mistakes of one's own people. Even then we must bear in mind that proceeding
on the offensive may always be dangerous. In this way we avoid the mistakes
that otherwise threaten, and succeed in what we set out to do. On the other
hand, perseverance in such over energetic behavior, especially toward persons
with whom there is no close connection, will lead to humiliation.






  
