33. TUN / Retreat



 above CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN  
below KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN



 The power of the dark is ascending. The light retreats to security, so that
the dark cannot encroach upon it. This retreat is a matter not of man's will
but of natural law. Therefore in this case withdrawal is proper; it is the
correct way to behave in order not to exhaust one's forces. In the calendar
this hexagram is linked with the sixth month (July-August), in which the
forces of winter are already showing their influence.



 THE JUDGMENT



 RETREAT. Success.  
In what is small, perseverance furthers.



 Conditions are such that the hostile forces favored by the time are
advancing. In this case retreat is the right course, and it is not to be
confused with flight. Flight means saving oneself under any circumstances,
whereas retreat is a sign of strength. We must be careful not to miss the
right moment while we are in full possession of power and position. Then we
shall be able to interpret the signs of the time before it is too late and to
prepare for provisional retreat instead of being drawn into a desperate life-
and-death struggle. Thus we do not simple abandon the field to the opponent;
we make it difficult for him to advance by showing perseverance in single acts
of resistance. In this way we prepare, while retreating, for the counter-
movement. Understanding the laws of a constructive retreat of this sort is not
easy. The meaning that lies hidden in such a time is important.



 THE IMAGE



 Mountain under heaven: the image of RETREAT.



 Thus the superior man keeps the inferior man at a distance,



 Not angrily but with reserve.



 The mountain rises up under heaven, but owing to its nature it finally comes
to a stop. Heaven on the other hand retreats upward before it into the
distance and remains out of reach. This symbolizes the behavior of the
superior man toward a climbing inferior; he retreats into his own thoughts as
the inferior man comes forward. He does not hate him, for hatred is a form of
subjective involvement by which we are bound to the hated object. The superior
man shows strength (heaven) in that he brings the inferior man to a standstill
(mountain) by his dignified reserve.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 At the tail in retreat. This is dangerous.  
One must not wish to undertake anything.



 Since the hexagram is the picture of something that is retreating, the
lowest line represents the tail and the top line the head. In a retreat it is
advantageous to be at the front. Here one is at the back, in immediate contact
with the pursuing enemy. This is dangerous, and under such circumstances it is
not advisable to undertake anything. Keeping still is the easiest way of
escaping from the threatening danger.



 Six in the second place means:



 he holds him fast with yellow oxhide.



 No one can tear him loose.



 Yellow is the color of the middle. It indicates that which is correct and in
line with duty. Oxhide is strong and not to be torn. While the superior men
retreat and the inferior press after them, the inferior man represented here
holds on so firmly and tightly to the superior man that the latter cannot
shake him off. And because he is in quest of what is right an so strong in
purpose, he reaches his goal. Thus the line confirms what is said in the
Judgment: "In what is small" --here equivalent to "in the inferior man" --
"perseverance furthers."



 Nine in the third place means:



 A halted retreat  
Is nerve-wracking and dangerous.



 To retain people as men- and maidservants  
Brings good fortune.



 When it is time to retreat it is both unpleasant and dangerous to be held
back, because then one no longer has freedom of action. In such a case the
only expedient is to take into one's service, so to speak, those who refuse to
let one go, so that one may at least keep one's initiative and not fall
helplessly under their domination. But even with this expedient the situation
is far from satisfactory--for what can one hope to accomplish with such
servants?



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 Voluntary retreat brings good fortune to the superior man  
And downfall to the inferior man.



 In retreating the superior man is intent on taking his departure willingly
and in all friendliness. He easily adjusts his mind to retreat, because in
retreating he does not have to do violence to his convictions. The only one
who suffers is the inferior man from whom he retreats, who will degenerate
when deprived of the guidance of the superior man.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Friendly retreat. Perseverance brings good fortune.



 It is the business of the superior man to recognize in time that the moment
for retreat has come. If the right moment is chosen, the retreat can be
carried out within the forms of perfect friendliness, without the necessity of
disagreeable discussions. Yet, for all the observance of amenities, absolute
firmness of decision is necessary if one is not to be led astray by irrelevant
considerations.



 Nine at the top means:



 Cheerful retreat. Everything serves to further.



 The situation is unequivocal. Inner detachment has become an established
fact, and we are at liberty to depart. When one sees the way ahead thus
clearly, free of all doubt, a cheerful mood sets in, and one chooses what is
right without further thought. Such a clear path ahead always leads to the
good.






  
