39. Chien / Obstruction



 above K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER  
below KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN



 The hexagram pictures a dangerous abyss lying before us and a steep,
inaccessible mountain rising behind us. We are surrounded by obstacles; at the
same time, since the mountain has the attribute of keeping still, there is
implicit a hint as to how we can extricate ourselves. The hexagram represents
obstructions that appear in the course of time but that can and should be
overcome. Therefore all the instruction given is directed to overcoming them.



 THE JUDGMENT



 OBSTRUCTION. The southwest furthers.



 The northeast does not further.  
It furthers one to see the great man.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 The southwest is the region of retreat, the northeast that of advance. Here
an individual is confronted by obstacles that cannot be overcome directly. In
such a situation it is wise to pause in view of the danger and to retreat.
However, this is merely a preparation for overcoming the obstructions. One
must join forces with friends of like mind and put himself under the
leadership of a man equal to the situation: then one will succeed in removing
the obstacles. This requires the will to persevere just when one apparently
must do something that leads away from his goal. This unswerving inner purpose
brings good fortune in the end. An obstruction that lasts only for a time is
useful for self-development. This is the value of adversity.



 THE IMAGE



 Water on the mountain:



 The image of OBSTRUCTION.



 Thus the superior man turns his attention to himself  
And molds his character.



 Difficulties and obstructions throw a man back upon himself. While the
inferior man seeks to put the blame on other persons, bewailing his fate, the
superior man seeks the error within himself, and through this introspection
the external obstacle becomes for him an occasion for inner enrichment and
education.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Going leads to obstructions,  
Coming meets with praise.



 When one encounters an obstruction, the important thing is to reflect on how
best to deal with it. When threatened with danger, one should not strive
blindly to go ahead, for this only leads to complications. The correct thing
is, on the contrary, to retreat for the time being, not in order to give up
the struggle but to await the right moment for action.



 Six in the second place means:



 The King's servant is beset by obstruction upon obstruction,  
But it is not his own fault.



 Ordinarily it is best to go around an obstacle and try to overcome it along
the line of least resistance. But there is one instance in which a man must go
out to meet the trouble, even though difficulty piles upon difficulty: this is
when the path of duty leads directly to it-in other words, when he cannot act
of his own volition but is duty bound to go and seek out danger in the service
of a higher cause. Then he may do it without compunction, because it is not
through any fault of his that he is putting himself in this difficult
situation.



 Nine in the third place means:



 Going leads to obstructions;  
Hence he comes back.



 While the preceding line shows the official compelled by duty to follow the
way of danger, this line shows the man who must act as father of a family or
as head of his kin. If he were to plunge recklessly in to danger, it would be
a useless act, because those entrusted to his care cannot get along by
themselves. But if he withdraws and turns back to his own, they welcome him
with great joy.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Going leads to obstructions,  
Coming leads to union.



 This too describes a situation that cannot be managed single-handed. In such
a case the direct way is not the shortest. If a person were to forge ahead on
his own strength and without the necessary preparations, he would not find the
support he needs and would realize too late that he has been mistaken in his
calculations, inasmuch as the conditions on which he hoped he could rely would
prove to be inadequate. In this case it is better, therefore, to hold back for
the time being and to gather together trustworthy companions who can be
counted upon for help in overcoming the obstructions.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 In the midst of the greatest obstructions,  
Friends come.



 Here we see a man who is called to help in an emergency. He should not seek
to evade the obstructions, no matter how dangerously they pile up before him.
But because he is really called to the task, the power of his spirit is strong
enough to attract helpers whom he can effectively organize, so that through
the well-directed co-operation of all participants the obstruction is
overcome.



 Six at the top means:



 Going leads to obstructions,  
Coming leads to great good fortune.  
It furthers one to see the great man.



 This refers to a man who has already left the world and its tumult behind
him. When the time of obstructions arrives, it might seem that the simplest
thing for him to do would be to turn his back upon the world and take refuge
in the beyond. But this road is barred to him. He must not seek his own
salvation and abandon the world to its adversity. Duty calls him back once
more into the turmoil of life. Precisely because of his experience and inner
freedom, he is able to create something both great and complete that brings
good fortune. And it is favorable to see the great man in alliance with whom
one can achieve the work of rescue.






  
