3. Chun / Difficulty at the Beginning



 above K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER  
below CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER



 The name of the hexagram, Chun, really connotes a blade of grass pushing
against an obstacle as it sprouts out of the earth--hence the meaning,
"difficulty at the beginning." The hexagram indicates the way in which heaven
and earth bring forth individual beings. It is their first meeting, which is
beset with difficulties. The lower trigram Chen is the Arousing; its motion is
upward and its image is thunder. The upper trigram K'an stands for the
Abysmal, the dangerous. Its motion is downward and its image is rain. The
situation points to teeming, chaotic profusion; thunder and rain fill the air.
But the chaos clears up. While the Abysmal sinks, the upward movement
eventually passes beyond the danger. A thunderstorm brings release from
tension, and all things breathe freely again.



 THE JUDGMENT



 DIFFICULTY AT THE BEGINNING works supreme success,  
Furthering through perseverance.  
Nothing should be undertaken.  
It furthers one to appoint helpers.



 Times of growth are beset with difficulties. They resemble a first birth.
But these difficulties arise from the very profusion of all that is struggling
to attain form . Everything is in motion: therefore if one perseveres there is
a prospect of great success, in spite of the existing danger. When it is a
man's fate to undertake such new beginnings, everything is still unformed,
dark. Hence he must hold back, because any premature move might bring
disaster. Likewise, it is very important not to remain alone; in order to
overcome the chaos he needs helpers. This is not to say, however, that he
himself should look on passively at what is happening. He must lend his hand
and participate with inspiration and guidance.



 THE IMAGE



 Clouds and thunder:



 The image of DIFFICULTY AT THE BEGINNING.



 Thus the superior man  
Brings order out of confusion.



 Clouds and thunder are represented by definite decorative lines; this means
that in the chaos of difficulty at the beginning, order is already implicit.
So too the superior man has to arrange and organize the inchoate profusion of
such times of beginning, just as one sorts out silk threads from a knotted
tangle and binds them into skeins. In order to find one's place in the
infinity of being, one must be able both to separate and to unite.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Hesitation and hindrance.  
It furthers one to remain persevering.  
It furthers one to appoint helpers.



 If a person encounters a hindrance at the beginning of an enterprise, he
must not try to force advance but must pause and take thought. However,
nothing should put him off his course; he must persevere and constantly keep
the goal in sight. It is important to seek out the right assistants, but he
can find them only if he avoids arrogance and associated with his fellows in a
spirit of humility. Only then will he attract those with whose help he can
combat the difficulties.



 Six in the second place means:



 Difficulties pile up.  
Horse and wagon part.  
He is not a robber;  
He wants to woo when the time comes.  
The maiden is chaste,  
She does not pledge herself.  
Ten years--then she pledges herself.



 We find ourselves beset by difficulties and hindrances. Suddenly there is a
turn of affairs, as if someone were coming up with a horse and wagon and
unhitching them. This event comes so unexpectedly that we assume the newcomer
to be a robber. Gradually it becomes clear that he has no evil intentions but
seeks to be friendly and to offer help. But this offer is not to be accepted,
because it does not come from the right quarter. We must wait until the time
is fulfilled; ten years is a fulfilled cycle of time. Then normal conditions
return of themselves, and we can join forces with the friend intended for us.
Using the image of a betrothed girl who remains true to her lover in face of
grave conflicts, the hexagram gives counsel for a special situation. When in
times of difficulty a hindrance is encountered and unexpected relief is
offered from a source unrelated to us, we must be careful and not take upon
ourselves any obligations entailed by such help; otherwise our freedom of
decision is impaired. If we bide our time, things will quiet down again, and
we shall attain what we have hoped for.



 Six in the third place means:



 Whoever hunts deer without the forester  
Only loses his way in the forest.  
The superior man understands the signs of the time  
And prefers to desist.  
To go on brings humiliation.



 If a man tries to hunt in a strange forest and has no guide, he loses his
way. When he finds himself in difficulties he must not try to steal out of
them unthinkingly and without guidance. Fate cannot be duped; premature
effort, without the necessary guidance, ends in failure and disgrace.
Therefore the superior man, discerning the seeds of coming events, prefers to
renounce a wish rather than to provoke failure and humiliation by trying to
force its fulfillment.  



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Horse and wagon part.  
Strive for union.  
To go brings good fortune.  
Everything acts to further.



 We are in a situation in which it is our duty to act, but we lack sufficient
power. However, an opportunity to make connections offers itself. It must be
seized. Neither false pride nor false reserve should deter us. Bringing
oneself to take the first step, even when it involves a certain degree of
self-abnegation, is a sign of inner clarity. To accept help in a difficult
situation is not a disgrace. If the right helper is found, all goes well.  


Nine in the fifth place means:



 Difficulties in blessing.  
A little perseverance brings good fortune.  
Great perseverance brings misfortune.



 An individual is in a position in which he cannot so express his good
intentions that they will actually take shape and be understood. Other people
interpose and distort everything he does. He should then be cautious and
proceed step by step. He must not try to force the consummation of a great
undertaking, because success is possible only when general confidence already
prevails. It is only through faithful and conscientious work, unobtrusively
carried on, that the situation gradually clears up and the hindrance
disappears.



 Six at the top means:



 Horse and wagon part.  
Bloody tears flow.



 The difficulties at the beginning are too great for some persons. They get
stuck and never find their way out; they fold their hands and give up the
struggle. Such resignation is the saddest of all things. Therefore Confucius
says of this line: "Bloody tears flow: one should not persist in this."
