36. Ming I / Darkening of the light



 above K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 Here the sun has sunk under the earth and is therefore darkened. The name of
the hexagram means literally "wounding of the bright"; hence the individual
lines contain frequent references to wounding. The situation is the exact
opposite of that in the foregoing hexagram. In the latter a wise man at the
head of affairs has able helpers, and in company with them makes progress;
here a man of dark nature is in a position of authority and brings harm to the
wise and able man.



 THE JUDGMENT



 DARKENING OF THE LIGHT. In adversity  
It furthers one to be persevering.  



 One must not unresistingly let himself be swept along by unfavorable
circumstances, nor permit his steadfastness to be shaken. He can avoid this by
maintaining his inner light, while remaining outwardly yielding and tractable.
With this attitude he can overcome even the greatest adversities. In some
situations indeed a man must hide his light, in order to make his will prevail
inspite of difficulties in his immediate environment. Perseverance must dwell
in inmost consciousness and should not be discernible from without. Only thus
is a man able to maintain his will in the face of difficulties.



 THE IMAGE



 The light has sunk into the earth:



 The image of DARKENING OF THE LIGHT.



 Thus does the superior man live with the great mass:  
He veils his light, yet still shines.



 In a time of darkness it is essential to be cautious and reserved. One
should not needlessly awaken overwhelming enmity by inconsiderate behavior. In
such times one ought not to fall in with the practices of others; neither
should one drag them censoriously into the light. In social intercourse one
should not try to be all-knowing. One should let many things pass, without
being duped.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Darkening of the light during flight.  
He lowers his wings.



 The superior man does not eat for three days  
On his wanderings.  
But he has somewhere to go.



 The host has occasion to gossip about him.



 With grandiose resolve a man endeavors to soar above all obstacles, but thus
encounters a hostile fate. He retreats and evades the issue. The time is
difficult. Without rest, he must hurry along, with no permanent abiding place.
If he does not want to make compromises within himself, but insists on
remaining true to his principles, he suffers deprivation. Never the less he
has a fixed goal to strive for even though the people with whom he lives do
not understand him and speak ill of him.  
Six in the second place means:



 Darkening of the light injures him in the left thigh.  
He gives aid with the strength of a horse.  
Good fortune.



 Here the Lord of Light is in a subordinate place and is wounded by the Lord
of Darkness. But the injury is not fatal; it is only a hindrance. Rescue is
still possible. The wounded man gives no thought to himself; he thinks only of
saving the others who are also in danger. Therefore he tries with all his
strength to save all that can be saved. There is good fortune in thus acting
according to duty.



 Nine in the third place means:



 Darkening of the light during the hunt in the south.



 Their great leader is captured.  
One must not expect perseverance too soon.



 It seems as if chance were at work. While the strong, loyal man is striving
eagerly and in good faith to create order, he meets the ringleader of the
disorder, as if by accident, and seizes him. Thus victory is achieved. But in
abolishing abuses one must not be too hasty. This would turn out badly because
the abuses have been in existence so long.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 He penetrates the left side of the belly.  
One gets at the very heart of the darkening of the light.



 We find ourselves close to the commander of darkness and so discover his mot
secret thoughts. In this way we realize that there is no longer any hope of
improvement, and thus we are enabled to leave the scene of disaster before the
storm breaks.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Darkening of the light as with Prince Chi.  
Perseverance furthers.



 Prince Chi lived at the court of the evil tyrant Chou Hsin, who, although
not mentioned by name, furnished the historical example on which this whole
situation is based. Prince Chi was a relative of the tyrant and could not
withdraw from the court; therefore he concealed his true sentiments and
feigned insanity. Although he was held a slave, he did not allow external
misery to deflect him from his convictions. This provides a teaching for those
who cannot leave their posts in times of darkness. In order to escape danger,
they need invincible perseverance of spirit and redoubled caution in their
dealings with the world.



 Six at the top means:



 Not light but darkness.  
First he climbed up to heaven,



 Then plunged into the depths of the earth.



 Here the climax of the darkening is reached. The dark power at first held so
high a place that it could wound all who were on the side of good and of the
light. But in the end it perishes of its own darkness, for evil must itself
fall at the very moment when it has wholly overcome the good, and thus
consumed the energy to which it owed its duration.






  
