37\. Chia Jen / The Family [The Clan]



 above SUN THE GENTLE, WIND  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 The hexagram represents the laws obtaining within the family. The strong
line at the top represents the father, the lowest the son. The strong line in
the fifth place represents the husband, the yielding second line the wife. On
the other hand, the two strong lines in the fifth and the third place
represent two brothers, and the two weak lines correlated with them in the
fourth and the second place stand for their respective wives. Thus all the
connections and relationships within the family find their appropriate
expression. Each individual line has the character according with its place.
The fact that a strong line occupies the sixth place-where a weak line might
be expected-indicates very clearly the strong leadership that must come from
the head of the family. The line is to be considered here not in its quality
as the sixth but in its quality as the top line. THE FAMILY shows the laws
operative within the household that, transferred to outside life, keep the
state and the world in order. The influence that goes out from within the
family is represented by the symbol of the wind created by fire.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE FAMILY. The perseverance of the woman furthers.



 The foundation of the family is the relationship between husband and wife.
The tie that hold the family together lies in the loyalty and perseverance of
the wife. The tie that holds the family together lies in the loyalty and
perseverance of the wife. Her place is within (second line), while that of the
husband is without (fifth line). It is in accord with the great laws of nature
that husband and wife take their proper places. Within the family a strong
authority is needed; this is represented by the parents. If the father is
really a father and the son a son, if the elder brother fulfills his position,
and the younger fulfills his, if the husband is really a husband and the wife
a wife, then the family is in order. When the family is in order, all the
social relationships of mankind will be in order. Three of the five social
relationships are to be found within the family-that between father and son,
which is the relation of love, that between the husband and wife, which is the
relation of chaste conduct, and that between elder and younger brother, which
is the relation of correctness. The loving reverence of the son is then
carried over to the prince in the form of faithfulness to duty; the affection
and correctness of behavior existing between the two brothers are extended to
a friend in the form of loyalty, and to a person of superior rank in the form
of deference. The family is society in the embryo; it is the native soil on
which performance of moral duty is made early through natural affection, so
that within a small circle a basis of moral practice is created, and this is
later widened to include human relationships in general.



 THE IMAGE



 Wind comes forth from fire:



 The image of THE FAMILY.Thus the superior man has substance in his words  
And duration in his way of life.



 Heat creates energy: this is signified by the wind stirred up by the fire
and issuing forth form it. This represents influence working from within
outward. The same thing is needed in the regulation of the family. Here too
the influence on others must proceed form one's own person. In order to be
capable of producing such an influence, one's words must have power, and this
they can have only if they are based on something real, just as flame depends
on its fuel Words have influence only when they are pertinent and clearly
related to definite circumstances. General discourses and admonitions have no
effect whatsoever. Furthermore, the words must be supported by one's entire
conduct, just as the wind is made effective by am impression on others that
they can adapt and conform to it. If words and conduct are not in accord and
consistent, they will have no effect.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Firm seclusion within the family.  
Remorse disappears.



 The family must form a well-defined unit within which each member knows his
place. From the beginning each child must be accustomed to firmly established
rules of order, before ever its will is directed to other things. If we begin
too late to enforce order, when the will of the child has already been
overindulged, the whims and passions, grown stronger with the years, offer
resistance and give cause for remorse. If we insist on order from the outset,
occasions for remorse may arise-in general social life these are unavoidable-
but the remorse always disappears again, and everything rights itself. For
there is nothing easily avoided and more difficult to carry through than
"breaking a child's will."  
Six in the second place means:



 She should not follow her whims.



 She must attend within to the food.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 The wife must always be guided by the will of the master of the house, be he
father, husband, or grown son. There, without having to look for them, she has
great and important duties. She must attend to the nourishment of her family
and to the food for the sacrifice. IN this way she becomes the center of the
social and religious life of the family, and her perseverance in this position
brings good fortune to the whole house. In relation to general conditions, the
counsel here is to seek nothing by means of force, but quietly to confine
oneself to the duties at hand.



 Nine in the third place means:



 When tempers flare up in the family,



 Too great severity brings remorse.  
Good fortune nonetheless.  
When woman and chile dally and laugh  
It leads in the end to humiliation.



 In the family the proper mean between severity and indulgence ought to
prevail. Too great severity toward one's own flesh and blood leads to remorse.
The wise thing is to build strong dikes within which complete freedom of
movement is allowed each individual. But in doubtful instances too great
severity, despite occasional mistakes, is preferable, because it preserves
discipline in the family, whereas too great weakness leads to disgrace.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 She is the treasure of the house.  
Great good fortune.



 It is upon the woman of the house that the well-being of the family depends.
Well-being prevails when expenditures and income are soundly balanced. This
leads to great good fortune. In the sphere of public life, this line refers to
the faithful steward whose measures further the general welfare.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 As a king he approaches his family.  
Fear not.  
Good fortune.



 A king is the symbol of a fatherly man who is richly endowed in mind. He
does nothing to make himself feared; on the contrary, the whole family can
trust him, because love governs their intercourse. His character of itself
exercises the right influence.



 Nine at the top means:



 His work commands respect.'  
In the end good fortune comes.



 In the last analysis, order within the family depends on the character of
the master of the house. If he cultivates his personality so that it works
impressively through the force of inner truth, all goes well with the family.
In a ruling position one must of his own accord assume responsibility.






  
