31. Hsien / Influence (Wooing)



 above TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE  
below KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN



 The name of the hexagram means "universal," "general," and in a figurative
sense "to influence," "to stimulate." The upper trigram is Tui, the Joyous;
the lower is Ken, Keeping still. By its persistent, quiet influence, the
lower, rigid trigram stimulates the upper, weak trigram, which responds to
this stimulation cheerfully and joyously. Ken, the lower trigram, is the
youngest son; the upper, Tui, is the youngest daughter. Thus the universal
mutual attraction between the sexes is represented. In courtship, the
masculine principle must seize the initiative and place itself below the
feminine principle. Just as the first part of book 1 begins with the hexagrams
of heaven and earth, the foundations of all that exists, the second part
begins with the hexagrams of courtship and marriage, the foundations of all
social relationships.



 THE JUDGMENT



 Influence. Success.  
Perseverance furthers.



 To take a maiden to wife brings good fortune.



 The weak element is above, the strong below; hence their powers attract each
other, so that they unite. This brings about success, for all success depends
on the effect of mutual attraction. By keeping still within while experiencing
joy without, one can prevent the joy from going to excess and hold it within
proper bounds. This is the meaning of the added admonition, "Perseverance
furthers," for it is perseverance that makes the difference between seduction
and courtship; in the latter the strong man takes a position inferior to that
of the weak girl and shows consideration for her. This attraction between
affinities is a general law of nature. Heaven and earth attract each other and
thus all creatures come into being. Through such attraction the sage
influences men's hearts, and thus the world attains peace. From the
attractions they exert we can learn the nature of all beings in heaven and on
earth.



 THE IMAGE



 A lake on the mountain:



 The image of influence.



 Thus the superior man encourages people to approach him  
By his readiness to receive them.



 A mountain with a lake on its summit is stimulated by the moisture from the
lake. It has this advantage because its summit does not jut out as a peak but
is sunken. The image counsels that the mind should be kept humble and free, so
that it may remain receptive to good advice. People soon give up counseling a
man who thinks that he knows everything better than anyone else.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 The influence shows itself in the big toe.



 A movement, before it is actually carried out, shows itself first in the
toes. The idea of an influence is already present, but is not immediately
apparent to others. As long as the intention has no visible effect, it is of
no importance to the outside world and leads neither to good nor to evil.



 Six in the second place means:



 The influence shows itself in the calves of the legs.  
Misfortune.



 Tarrying brings good fortune.



 In movement, the calf of the leg follows the foot; by itself it can neither
go forward nor stand still. Since the movement is not self-governed, it bodes
ill. One should wait quietly until one is impelled to action by a real
influence. Then one remains uninjured.



 Nine in the third place means:



 The influence shows itself in the thighs.  
Holds to that which follows it.



 To continue is humiliating.  



 Every mood of the heart influences us to movement. What the heart desires,
the thighs run after without a moment's hesitation; they hold to the heart,
which they follow. In the life of man, however, acting on the spur of every
caprice is wrong and if continued leads to humiliation. Three considerations
suggest themselves here. First, a man should not run precipitately after all
the persons whom he would like to influence, but must be able to hold back
under certain circumstances. As little should he yield immediately to every
whim of those in whose service he stands. Finally, where the moods of his own
heart are concerned, he should never ignore the possibility of inhibition, for
this is the basis of human freedom.  
Nine in the fourth place means:



 Perseverance brings good fortune.  
Remorse disappears.  
If a man is agitated in mind,  
And his thoughts go hither and thither,  
Only those friends  
On whom he fixes his conscious thoughts  
Will follow.



 Here the place of the heart is reached. The impulse that springs from this
source is the most important of all. It is of particular concern that this
influence be constant and good; then, in spite of the danger arising from the
great susceptibility of the human heart, there will be no cause for remorse.
When the quiet power of a man's own character is at work, the effects produced
are right. All those who are receptive to the vibrations of such a spirit will
then be influenced. Influence over others should not express itself as a
conscious and willed effort to manipulate them. Through practicing such
conscious incitement, one becomes wrought up and is exhausted by the eternal
stress and strain. Moreover, the effects produced are then limited to those on
whom one's thoughts are consciously fixed.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 The influence shows itself in the back of the neck.



 No remorse.



 The back of the neck is the most rigid part of the body. When the influence
shows itself there, the will remains firm and the influence does not lead to
confusion. Hence remorse does not enter into consideration here. What takes
place in the depths of one's being, in the unconscious mind. It is true that
if we cannot be influenced ourselves, we cannot influence the outside world.



 Six at the top means:



 The influence shows itself in the jaws, cheeks, and tongue.



 The most superficial way of trying to influence others is through talk that
has nothing real behind it. The influence produced by such mere tongue wagging
must necessarily remain insignificant. Hence no indication is added regarding
good or bad fortune.






  
