40. Hsieh / Deliverance



 above CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 Here the movement goes out of the sphere of danger. The obstacle has been
removed, the difficulties are being resolved. Deliverance is not yet achieved;
it is just in its beginning, and the hexagram represents its various stages.



 THE JUDGMENT



 DELIVERANCE. The southwest furthers.  
If there is no longer anything where one has to go,  
Return brings good fortune.  
If there is still something where one has to go,  
Hastening brings good fortune.



 This refers to a time in which tensions and complications begin to be eased.
At such times we ought to make our way back to ordinary conditions as soon as
possible; this is the meaning of "the southwest." These periods of sudden
change have great importance. Just as rain relieves atmospheric tension,
making all the buds burst open, so a time of deliverance from burdensome
pressure has a liberating and stimulating effect on life. One thing is
important, however: in such times we must not overdo our triumph. The point is
not to push on farther than is necessary. Returning to the regular order of
life as soon as deliverance is achieved brings good fortune. If there are any
residual matters that ought to be attended to, it should be done as quickly as
possible, so that a clean sweep is made and no retardations occur.



 THE IMAGE



 Thunder and rain set in:



 The image of DELIVERANCE.



 Thus the superior man pardons mistakes  
And forgives misdeeds.



 A thunderstorm has the effect of clearing the air; the superior man produces
a similar effect when dealing with mistakes and sins of men that induce a
condition of tension. Through clarity he brings deliverance. However, when
failings come to light, he does not dwell on them; he simply passes over
mistakes, the unintentional transgressions, just as thunder dies away. He
forgives misdeeds, the intentional transgressions, just as water washes
everything clean.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Without blame.



 In keeping with the situation, few words are needed. The hindrance is past,
deliverance has come. One recuperates in peace and keeps still. This is the
right thing to do in times when difficulties have been overcome.  
Nine in the second place means:



 One kills three foxes in the field  
And receives a yellow arrow.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 The image is taken from the hunt. The hunter catches three cunning foxes and
receives a yellow arrow as a reward. The obstacles in public life are the
designing foxes who try to influence the ruler through flattery. They must be
removed before there can be any deliverance. But the struggle must not be
carried on with the wrong weapons. The yellow color points to measure and mean
in proceeding against the enemy; the arrow signifies the straight course. If
one devotes himself wholeheartedly to the task of deliverance, he develops so
much inner strength from his rectitude that it acts as a weapon against all
that is false and low.



 Six in the third place means:



 If a man carries a burden on his back  
And nonetheless rides in a carriage,  
He thereby encourages robbers to draw near.  
Perseverance leads to humiliation.



 This refers to a man who has come out of needy circumstances in to comfort
and freedom from want. If now, in the manner of an upstart, he tries to take
his ease in comfortable surroundings that do not suit his nature, he thereby
attracts robbers. If he goes on thus he is sure to bring disgrace upon
himself. Confucius says about this line:



 Carrying a burden on the back is the business of common man; a carriage is
the appurtenance of a man of rank. Now, when a common man uses the
appurtenance of man of rank, robbers plot to take it away from him. If a man
is insolent toward those above him and hard toward those below him, robbers
plot to attack him. Carelessness in guarding things tempts thieves to steal.
Sumptuous ornaments worn by a maiden are an enticement to rob her of her
virtue.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 Deliver yourself from your great toe.



 Then the companion comes,  
And him you can trust.



 In times of standstill it will happen that inferior people attach themselves
to a superior man, and through force of daily habit they may grow very close
to him and become indispensable, just as the big toe is indispensable to the
foot because it makes walking easier. But when the time of deliverance draws
near, with its call to deeds, a man must free himself from such chance
acquaintances with whim he has no inner connection. For otherwise the friends
who share his views, on whom he could really rely and together with whom he
could accomplish something, mistrust him and stay away.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 If only the superior man can deliver himself,  
It brings good fortune.



 Thus he proves to inferior men that he is in earnest.



 Times of deliverance demand inner resolve. Inferior people cannot be driven
off by prohibitions or any external means. If one desires to be rid of them,
he must first break completely with them in his own mind; they will see for
themselves that he is in earnest and will withdraw.



 Six at the top means:



 The prince shoots at a hawk on a high wall.  
He kills it. Everything serves to further.



 The hawk on a high wall is the symbol of a powerful inferior in a high
position who is hindering the deliverance. He withstands the force of inner
influences, because he is hardened in his wickedness. He must be forcibly
removed, and this requires appropriate means. Confucius says about this line:



 The hawk is the object of the hunt; bow and arrow are the tools and means.
The marksman is man (who must make proper use of the means to his end). The
superior man contains the means in his own person. He bides his time and then
acts. Why then should not everything go well? He acts and is free. Therefore
all he has to do is to go forth, and he takes his quarry. This is how a man
fares who acts after he has made ready the means.






  
