41. Sun / Decrease



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE



 This hexagram represents a decrease of the lower trigram in favor of the
upper, because the third line, originally strong, has moved up to the top, and
the top line, originally weak, has replaced it. What is below is decreased to
the benefit of what is above. This is out-and-out decrease. If the foundations
of a building are decreased in strength and the upper walls are strengthened,
the whole structure loves its stability. Likewise, a decrease in the
prosperity of the people in favor of the government is out-and-out decrease.
And the entire theme of the hexagram is directed to showing how this shift of
wealth can take place without causing the sources of wealth can take place
without causing the sources of wealth in the nation and its lower classes to
fail.



 THE JUDGMENT



 DECREASE combined with sincerity  
Brings about supreme good fortune  
Without blame.  
One may be persevering in this.  
It furthers one to undertake something.  
How is this to be carried out?  
One may use two small bowls for the sacrifice.



 Decrease does not under all circumstances mean something bad. Increase and
decrease come in their own time. What matters here is to understand the time
and not to try to cover up poverty with empty pretense. If a time of scanty
resources brings out an inner truth, one must not feel ashamed of simplicity.
For simplicity is then the very thing needed to provide inner strength for
further undertakings. Indeed, there need by no concern if the outward beauty
of the civilization, even the elaboration of religious forms, should have to
suffer because of simplicity. One must draw on the strength of the inner
attitude to compensate for what is lacking in externals; then the power of the
content makes up for the simplicity of form. There is no need of presenting
false appearances to God. Even with slender means, the sentiment of the heart
can be expressed.



 THE IMAGE



 At the foot of the mountain, the lake:



 The image of DECREASE.



 Thus the superior man controls his anger  
And restrains his instincts.



 The lake at the foot of the mountain evaporates. In this way it decreases to
the benefit of the mountain, which is enriched by its moisture. The mountain
stands as the symbol of stubborn strength that can harden into anger. The lake
is the symbol of unchecked gaiety that can develop into passionate drives at
the expense of the life forces. Therefore decrease is necessary; anger must be
decreased by keeping still, the instincts must be curbed by restriction. By
this decrease of the lower powers of the psyche, the higher aspects of the
soul are enriched/



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Going quickly when one's tasks are finished  
Is without blame.  
But one must reflect on how much one may decrease others.



 It is unselfish and good when a man, after completing his own urgent tasks,
uses his strength in the service of others, and without bragging or making
much of it, helps quickly where help is needed. But the man in a superior
position who is thus aided must weigh carefully how much he can accept without
doing the helpful servant or friend real harm. Only where such delicacy of
feeling exists can one give oneself unconditionally and without hesitation.



 Nine in the second place means:



 Perseverance furthers.



 To undertake something brings misfortune.  
Without decreasing oneself,  
One is able to bring increase to others.



 A high-minded self-awareness and a consistent seriousness with no forfeit of
dignity are necessary if a man wants to be of service to others. He who throw
himself away in order to do the bidding of a superior diminishes his own
position without thereby giving lasting benefit to the other. This is wrong.
To render true service of lasting value to another, one must serve him without
relinquishing oneself.



 Six in the third place means:



 When three people journey together,



 Their number increases by one.  
When one man journeys alone,  
He finds a companion.



 When there are three people together, jealousy arises. One of them will have
to go. Avery close bond is possible only between two people. But when one man
is lonely, he is certain to find a companion who complements him.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 If a man deceases his faults,  
It makes the other hasten to come and rejoice.



 No blame.



 A man's faults often prevent even well-disposed people from coming closer to
him. His faults are sometimes reinforced by the environment in which he lives.
But if in humility he can bring himself to the point of giving them up, he
frees his well-disposed friends from an inner pressure and causes them to
approach the more quickly, and there is mutual joy.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Someone does indeed increase him.



 Ten pairs of tortoises cannot oppose it.



 Supreme good fortune.  



 If someone is marked out by fate for good fortune, it comes without fail.
All oracles-as for instance those that are read from the shells of tortoises-
are bound to concur in giving him favorable signs. He need fear nothing,
because his luck is ordained from on high.



 Nine at the top means:



 If one is increased without depriving other,



 There is no blame.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.  
It furthers one to undertake something.  
One obtains servants  
But no longer has a separate home.



 There are people who dispense blessings to the whole world. Every increase
in power that comes to them benefits the whole of mankind and therefore does
not bring decrease to others. Through perseverance and zealous work a man wins
success and finds helpers as they are needed. But what he accomplishes is not
a limited private advantage; it is a public good and available to everyone.






  
