4. Meng / Youthful Folly



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 In this hexagram we are reminded of youth and folly in two different ways.
The image of the upper trigram, Ken, is the mountain, that of the lower, K'an,
is water; the spring rising at the foot of the mountain is the image of
inexperienced youth. Keeping still is the attribute of the upper trigram; that
of the lower is the abyss, danger. Stopping in perplexity on the brink of a
dangerous abyss is a symbol of the folly of youth. However, the two trigrams
also show the way of overcoming the follies of youth. Water is something that
of necessity flows on. When the spring gushes forth, it does not know at first
where it will go. But its steady flow fills up the deep place blocking its
progress, and success is attained.



 THE JUDGMENT



 YOUTHFUL FOLLY has success.  
It is not I who seek the young fool;  
The young fool seeks me.  
At the first oracle I inform him.  
If he asks two or three times, it is importunity.  
If he importunes, I give him no information.  
Perseverance furthers.



 In the time of youth, folly is not an evil. One may succeed in spite of it,
provided one finds an experienced teacher and has the right attitude toward
him. This means, first of all, that the youth himself must be conscious of his
lack of experience and must seek out the teacher. Without this modesty and
this interest there is no guarantee that he has the necessary receptivity,
which should express itself in respectful acceptance of the teacher. This is
the reason why the teacher must wait to be sought out instead of offering
himself. Only thus can the instruction take place at the right time and in the
right way. A teacher's answer to the question of a pupil ought to be clear and
definite like that expected from an oracle; thereupon it ought to be accepted
as a key for resolution of doubts and a basis for decision. If mistrustful or
unintelligent questioning is kept up, it serves only to annoy the teacher. He
does well to ignore it in silence, just as the oracle gives one answer only
and refuses to be tempted by questions implying doubt. Given addition a
perseverance that never slackens until the points are mastered one by one,
real success is sure to follow. Thus the hexagram counsels the teacher as well
as the pupil.



 THE IMAGE



 A spring wells up at the foot of the mountain:  
The image of YOUTH.



 Thus the superior man fosters his character  
By thoroughness in all that he does.



 A spring succeeds in flowing on and escapes stagnation by filling up all the



hollow places in its path. In the same way character is developed by
thoroughness that skips nothing but, like water, gradually and steadily fills
up all gaps and so flows onward.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 To make a fool develop  
It furthers one to apply discipline.  
The fetters should be removed.  
To go on in this way bring humiliation.



 Law is the beginning of education. Youth in its inexperience is inclined at
first to take everything carelessly and playfully. It must be shown the
seriousness of life. A certain measure of taking oneself in hand, brought
about by strict discipline, is a good thing. He who plays with life never
amounts to anything. However, discipline should not degenerate into drill.
Continuous drill has a humiliating effect and cripples a man's powers.



 Nine in the second place means:



 To bear with fools in kindliness brings good fortune.  
To know how to take women  
Brings good fortune.  
The son is capable of taking charge of the household.



 These lines picture a man who has no external power, but who has enough
strength of mind to bear his burden of responsibility. He has the inner
superiority and that enable him to tolerate with kindliness the shortcomings
of human folly. The same attitude is owed to women as the weaker sex. One must
understand them and give them recognition in a spirit of chivalrous
consideration. Only this combination of inner strength with outer reserve
enables one to take on the responsibility of directing a larger social body
with real success.



 Six in the third place means:



 Take not a maiden who. When she sees a man of bronze,  
Loses possession of herself.  
Nothing furthers.



 A weak, inexperienced man, struggling to rise, easily loses his own
individuality when he slavishly imitates a strong personality of higher
station. He is like a girl throwing herself away when she meets a strong man.
Such a servile approach should not be encouraged, because it is bad both for
the youth and the teacher. A girl owes it to her dignity to wait until she is
wooed. In both cases it is undignified to offer oneself, and no good comes of
accepting such an offer.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Entangled folly bring humiliation.  



 For youthful folly it is the most hopeless thing to entangle itself in empty
imaginings. The more obstinately it clings to such unreal fantasies, the more
certainly will humiliation overtake it. Often the teacher, when confronted
with such entangled folly, has no other course but to leave the fool to
himself for a time, not sparing him the humiliation that results. This is
frequently the only means of rescue.  



Six in the fifth place means:



 Childlike folly brings good fortune.



 An inexperienced person who seeks instruction in a childlike and unassuming
way is on the right path, for the man devoid of arrogance who subordinated
himself to his teacher will certainly be helped.



 Nine at the top means:



 In punishing folly  
It does not further one  
To commit transgressions.  
The only thing that furthers  
Is to prevent transgressions.

 Sometimes an incorrigible fool must be punished. He who will not heed will
be made to feel. This punishment is quite different from a preliminary shaking
up. But the penalty should not be imposed in anger; it must be restricted to
an objective guarding against unjustified excesses. Punishment is never an end
in itself but serves merely to restore order. This applies not only in regard
to education but also in regard to the measures taken by a government against
a populace guilty of transgressions. Governmental interference should always
be merely preventive and should have as its sole aim the establishment of
public security and peace.
