45. Ts'ui / Gathering Together [Massing]



 above TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE  
below K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH



 This hexagram is related in form and meaning to Pi, HOLDING TOGETHER



 8. In the latter, water is over the earth; here a lake is over the earth.
But since the lake is a place where water collects, the idea of gathering
together is even more strongly expressed here than in the other hexagram. The
same idea also arises from the fact that in the present case it is two strong
lines (the fourth and the fifth) that bring about the gather together, whereas
in the former case one strong line (the fifth) stands in the midst of weak
lines.



 THE JUDGMENT



 GATHERING TOGETHER. Success.



 The king approaches his temple.  
It furthers one to see the great man.



 This brings success. Perseverance furthers.



 To bring great offerings creates good fortune.  
It furthers one to undertake something.



 The gathering together of people in large communities is either a natural
occurrence, as in the case of the family, or an artificial one, as in the case
of the state. The family gathers about the father as its head. The
perpetuation of this gathering in groups is achieved through the sacrifice to
the ancestors, at which the whole clan is gathered together. Through the
collective piety of the living members of the family, the ancestors become so
integrated in the spiritual life of the family that it cannot be dispersed or
dissolved. Where men are to be gathered together, religious forces are needed.
But there must also be a human leader to serve as the center of the group. In
order to be able to bring others together, this leader must first of all be
collected within himself. Only collective moral force can unite the world.
Such great times of unification will leave great achievements behind them.
This is the significance of the great offerings that are made. In the secular
sphere likewise there is no need of great deeds in the time of GATHERING
TOGETHER.



 THE IMAGE



 Over the earth, the lake:



 The image of GATHERING TOGETHER.



 Thus the superior man renews his weapons  
In order to meet the unforeseen.



 If the water in the lake gathers until it rises above the earth, there is
danger of a break-through. Precautions must be taken to prevent this.
Similarly where men gather together in great numbers, strife is likely to
arise; where possessions are collected, robbery is likely to occur. Thus in
the time of GATHERING TOGETHER we must arm promptly to ward off the
unexpected. Human woes usually come as a result of unexpected events against
which we are not forearmed. If we are prepared, they can be prevented.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 If you are sincere, but not to the end,



 There will sometimes be confusion, sometimes gathering together.  
If you call out,



 Then after one grasp of the hand you can laugh again.  
Regret not. Going is without blame.



 The situation is this: People desire to gather around a leader to whom they
look up. But they are in a large group, by which they allow themselves to be
influenced, so that they waver in their decision. Thus they lack a firm center
around which to gather. But if expression is given to this need, and if they
call for help, one grasp of the hand from the leader is enough to turn away
all distress. Therefore they must not allow themselves to be led astray. It is
undoubtedly right that they should attach themselves to this leader.



 Six in the second place means:



 Letting oneself be drawn  
Brings good fortune and remains blameless.  
If one is sincere,  
It furthers one to bring even a small offering.



 In the time of GATHERING TOGETHER, we should make no arbitrary choice of the
way. There are secret forces at work, leading together those who belong
together. We must yield to this attraction; then we make no mistakes. Where
inner relationships exist, no great preparations and formalities are
necessary. People understand one another forthwith, just as the Divinity
graciously accepts a small offering if it comes from the heart.



 Six in the third place means:



 Gathering together amid sighs.



 Nothing that would further.  
Going is without blame.



 Slight humiliation.



 Often a man feels an urge to unite with others, but the individuals around
him have already formed themselves into a group, so that he remains isolated.
The whole situation proves untenable. Then he ought to choose the way of
progress, resolutely allying himself with a man who stands nearer to the
center of the group, and can help him to gain admission to the closed circle.
This is not a mistake, even though at first his position as an outsider is
somewhat humiliating.  
Nine in the fourth place means:



 Great good fortune. No blame.



 This describes a man who gathers people around him in the name of his ruler.
Since he is not striving for any special advantages for himself but is working
unselfishly to bring about general unity, his work is crowned with success,
and everything becomes as it should be.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 If in gathering together one has position,



 This brings no blame.  
If there are some who are not yet sincerely in the work,



 Sublime and enduring perseverance is needed.



 Then remorse disappears.



 When people spontaneously gather around a man, it is only a good. It gives
him a certain influence that can be altogether useful.. But of course there is
also the possibility that many may gather around him not because of a feeling
of confidence but merely because of his influential position. This is
certainly to be regretted. The only means of dealing with such people is to
gain their confidence through steadfastness an intensified, unswerving
devotion to duty. In this way secret mistrust will gradually be overcome, and
there will be no occasion for regret.



 Six at the top means:



 Lamenting and sighing, floods of tears.



 No blame.



 It may happen that an individual would like to ally himself with another,
but his good intentions are misunderstood. Then he becomes sad and laments.
But this is the right course. For it may cause the other person to come to his
senses, so that the alliance that has been sought and so painfully missed is
after all achieved.






  
