47. K'un / Oppression (Exhaustion)



 above TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 The lake is above, water below; the lake is empty, dried up. Exhaustion is
expressed in yet another way: at the top, a dark line is holding down two
light line; below, a light line is hemmed in between two dark ones. The upper
trigram belongs to the principle of darkness, the lower to the principle of
light. Thus everywhere superior men are oppressed and held in restraint by
inferior men.



 THE JUDGMENT



 OPPRESSION. Success. Perseverance.



 The great man brings about good fortune.



 No blame.  
When one has something to say,  
It is not believed.



 Times of adversity are the reverse of times of success, but they can lead to
success if they; befall the right man. When a strong man meets with adversity,
he remains cheerful despite all danger, and this cheerfulness is the source of
later successes; it is that stability which is stronger than fate. He who lets
his spirit be broken by exhaustion certainly has no success. But if adversity
only bends a man, it creates in him a power to react that is bound in time to
manifest itself. No inferior man is capable of this. Only the great man brings
about goof fortune and remains blameless. It is true that for the time being
outward influence is denied him, because his words have no effect. Therefore
in times of adversity it is important to be strong within and sparing of
words.



 THE IMAGE



 There is not water in the lake:



 The image of EXHAUSTION.



 Thus the superior man stakes his life  
On following his will.



 When the water has flowed out below, the lake must dry up and become
exhausted. That is fate. This symbolizes an adverse fate in human life. In
such times there is nothing a man can do but acquiesce in his fate and remain
true to himself. This concerns the deepest stratum of his being, for this
alone is superior to all external fate.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 One sits oppressed under a bare tree  
And strays into a gloomy valley.  
For three years one sees nothing.



 When adversity befalls a man, it is important above all things for him to be
strong and to overcome the trouble inwardly. If he is weak, the trouble
overwhelms him. Instead of proceeding on his way, he remains sitting under a
bare tree and falls ever more deeply into gloom and melancholy. This makes the
situation only more and more hopeless. Such an attitude comes from an inner
delusion that he must by all means overcome.  
Nine in the second place means:



 One is oppressed while at meat and drink.



 The man with the scarlet knee bands is just coming.  
It furthers one to offer sacrifice.



 To set forth brings misfortune.



 No blame.



 This pictures a state of inner oppression. Externally, all is well, one has
meat and drink. But one is exhausted by the commonplaces of life, and there
seems to be no way of escape. Then help comes from a high place. A prince-in
ancient China princes wore scarlet knee bands- is in search of able helpers.
But there are still obstructions to be overcome. Therefore it is important to
meet these obstructions in the visible realm by offerings and prayer. To set
forth without being prepared would be disastrous, though not morally wrong.
Here a disagreeable situation must be overcome by patience of spirit.



 Six in the third place means:



 A man permits himself to be oppressed by stone,  
And leans on thorns and thistles.  
He enters the house and does not see his wife.  
Misfortune.



 This shows a man who is restless and indecisive in times of adversity. At
first he wants to push ahead, then he encounters obstructions that, it is
true, mean oppression only when recklessly dealt with. He butts his head
against a wall and in consequence feels himself oppressed by the wall. Then he
leans on things that have in themselves no stability and that are merely a
hazard for him who leans on them. Thereupon he turns back irresolutely and
retires into his house, only to find, as a fresh disappointment, that his wife
is not there. Confucius says about this line:



 If a man permits himself to be oppressed by something that ought not to
oppress him, his name will certainly be disgraced. If he leans on things upon
which one cannot lean, his life will certainly be endangered. For him who is
in disgrace and danger, the hour of death draws near; how can he then still
see his wife?



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 He comes very quietly, oppressed in a golden carriage.  
Humiliation, but the end is reached.



 A well-to-do man sees the need of the lower classes and would like very much
to be of help. But instead of proceeding with speed and energy where their is
need, he begins in a hesitant and measured way. Then he encounters
obstructions. Powerful and wealthy acquaintances draw him into their circle;
he has to do as they do and cannot withdraw from them. Hence he finds himself
in great embarrassment. But the trouble is transitory. The original strength
of his nature offsets the mistake he has made, and the goal is reached.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 His nose and feet are cut off.  
Oppression at the hands of the man with the purple knee bands.  
Joy comes softly.  
It furthers one to make offerings and libations.



 An individual who has the good of mankind at heart is oppressed from above
and below (this is the meaning of the cutting off of nose an defeat). He finds
no help among the people whose duty it would be to aid in the work of rescue
(ministers wore purple knee bands). But little by little, things take a turn
for the better. Until that time, he should turn to God, firm in his inner
composure, and pray and offer sacrifice for the general well-being.



 Six at the top means:



 He is oppressed by creeping vines.  
He moves uncertainly and says, "Movement brings remorse."  
If one feels remorse over this and makes a start,  
Good fortune comes.



 A man is oppressed by bonds that can easily be broken. The distress is
drawing to an end. But he is still irresolute; he is still influenced by the
previous condition and fears that he may have cause for regret if he makes a
move. But as soon as he grasps the situation, changes this mental attitude,
and makes a firm decision, he masters the oppression.






  
