46. Sheng / Pushing Upward



 above K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH  
below SUN THE GENTLE, WIND, WOOD



 The lower trigram, Sun, represents wood, and the upper, K'un, means the
earth. Linked with this is the idea that wood in the earth grows upward. In
contrast to the meaning of Chin, PROGRESS



 35, this pushing upward is associated with effort, just as a plant needs
energy for pushing upward through the earth. That is why this hexagram,
although it is connected with success, is associated with effort of the will.
In PROGRESS the emphasis is on expansion; PUSHING UPWARD indicates rather a
vertical ascent-direct rise from obscurity and lowliness to power and
influence.



 THE JUDGMENT



 PUSHING UPWARD has supreme success.  
One must see the great man.  
Fear not.  
Departure toward the south  
Brings good fortune.



 The pushing upward of the good elements encounters no obstruction and is
therefore accompanied by great success. The pushing upward is made possible
not by violence but by modesty and adaptability. Since the individual is borne
along by the propitiousness of the time, he advances. He must go to see
authoritative people. He need not be afraid to do this, because success is
assured. But he must set to work, for activity (this is the meaning of "the
south") brings good fortune.



 THE IMAGE



 Within the earth, wood grows:



 The image of PUSHING UPWARD.



 Thus the superior man of devoted character  
Heaps up small things  
In order to achieve something high and great.



 Adapting itself to obstacles and bending around them, wood in the earth
grows upward without haste and without rest. Thus too the superior man is
devoted in character and never pauses in his progress.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Pushing upward that meets with confidence  
Brings great good fortune.



 This situation at the beginning of ascent. Just as wood draws strength for
its upward push from the root, which in itself is in the lowest place, so the
power to rise comes from this low and obscure station. But there is a
spiritual affinity with the rulers above, and this solidarity creates the
confidence needed to accomplish something.



 Nine in the second place means:



 If one is sincere,  
It furthers one to bring even a small offering.



 No blame.



 Here a strong man is presupposed. It is true that he does not fit in with
his environment, inasmuch as he is too brusque and pays too little attention
to form. But as he is upright in character, he meets with response, and his
lack of outward form does no harm. Here uprightness is the outcome of sound
qualities of character, whereas in the corresponding line of the preceding
hexagram it is the result of innate humility.



 Nine in the third place means:



 One pushes upward into an empty city.  



 All obstructions that generally block progress fall away here. Things
proceed with remarkable ease. Unhesitatingly one follows this road, in order
to profit by one's success. Seen from without, everything seems to be in the
best of order. However, no promise of good fortune is added. It is a question
how long such unobstructed success can last. But it is wise not to yield to
such misgivings, because they only inhibit one's power. Instead, the point is
to profit by the propitiousness of time.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 The king offers him Mount Ch'i.  
Good fortune. No blame.



 Mount Ch'i is in the western China, the homeland of King Wen, whose son, the
Duke of Chou, added the words to the individual lines. The pronouncement takes
us back to a time when the Chou dynasty was coming into power. At that time
King Wen introduced his illustrious helpers to the god of his native mountain,
and they received their places in the halls of the ancestors by the side of
the ruler. This indicates a stage in which pushing upward attains its goal.
One acquires fame in the sight of gods and men, is received into the circle of
those who foster the spiritual life of the nation, and thereby attains a
significance that endures beyond time.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Perseverance brings good fortune.  
One pushes upward by steps.



 When a man is advancing farther and farther, it is important for him not to
become intoxicated by success. Precisely when he experiences great success it
is necessary to remain sober and not to try to skip any stages; he must go on
slowly, step by step, as though hesitant. Only such calm, steady progress,
overleaping nothing, leads to the goal.



 Six at the top means:



 Pushing upward in darkness.  
It furthers one



 To be unremittingly persevering.



 He who pushes upward blindly deludes himself. He knows only advance, not
retreat. But this means exhaustion. In such a case it is important to be
constantly mindful that one must be conscientious and consistent and must
remain so. Only thus does one become free of blind impulse, which is always
harmful.






  
