42. I / Increase



 above SUN THE GENTLE, WIND  
below CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER



 The idea of increase is expressed in the fact that the strong lowest line of
the upper trigram has sunk down and taken its place under the lower trigram.
This conception also expresses the fundamental idea on which the Book of
Changes is based. To rule truly is to serve. A sacrifice of the higher element
that produces an increase of the lower is called an out-and-out increase: it
indicates the spirit that alone has power to help the world.



 THE JUDGMENT



 INCREASE. It furthers one



 To undertake something.  
It furthers one to cross the great water.



 Sacrifice on the part of those above for the increase of those below fills
the people with a sense of joy and gratitude that is extremely valuable for
the flowering of the commonwealth. When people are thus devoted to their
leaders, undertakings are possible, and even difficult and dangerous
enterprises will succeed. Therefore in such times of progress and successful
development it is necessary to work and make the best use of time. This time
resembles that of the marriage of heaven and earth, when the earth partakes of
the creative power of heaven, forming and bringing forth living beings. The
time of INCREASE does not endure, therefore it must be utilized while it
lasts.



 THE IMAGE



 Wind and thunder: the image of INCREASE.



 Thus the superior man:  
If he sees good, he imitates it;  
If he has faults, he rids himself of them.



 While observing how thunder and wind increase and strengthen each other, a
man can not the way to self-increase and self-improvement. When he discovers
good in others, he should imitate it and thus make everything on earth his
own. If he perceives something bad in himself, let him rid himself of it. In
this way he becomes free of evil. This ethical change represents the most
important increase of personality.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 It furthers one to accomplish great deeds.



 Supreme good fortune. No blame.



 If great help comes to a man from on high, this increased strength must be
used to achieve something great for which he might otherwise never have found
energy, or readiness to take responsibility. Great good fortune is produced by
selflessness, and in bringing about great good fortune, he remains free of
reproach.  
Six in the second place means:



 Someone does indeed increase him;



 Ten pairs of tortoises cannot oppose it.  
Constant perseverance brings good fortune.



 The king presents him before God.  
Good fortune.



 A man brings about real increase by producing in himself the conditions for
it, that it, through receptivity to and love of the good. Thus the thing for
which he strives comes of itself, with the inevitability of natural law. Where
increase is thus in harmony with the highest laws of the universe, it cannot
be prevented by any constellation of accidents. But everything depends on his
not letting unexpected good fortune make him heedless; he must make it his own
through inner strength an steadfastness. Then he acquires meaning before God
and man, and can accomplish something for the good of the world.



 Six in the third place means:



 One is enriched through unfortunate events.



 No blame, if you are sincere  
And walk in the middle,  
And report with a seal to the prince.



 A time of blessing and enrichment has such powerful effects that even events
ordinarily unfortunate must turn out to the advantage of those affected by
them. These persons become free of error, and by acting in harmony with truth
they gain such inner authority that they exert influence as if sanctioned by
the letter and seal.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 If you walk in the middle  
And report the prince,  
He will follow.  
It furthers one to be used  
In the removal of the capital.



 It is important that there should be men who mediate between leaders and
followers. These should be disinterested people, especially in times of
increase, since the benefit is to spread from the leader to the people.
Nothing of this benefit should be held back in a selfish way; it should really
reach those for whom it is intended. This sort of intermediary, who also
exercises a good influence on the leader, is especially important in times
when it is a matter of great undertakings, decisive for the future and
requiring the inner assent of all concerned.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 If in truth you have a kind heart, ask not.



 Supreme good fortune.



 Truly, kindness will be recognized as your virtue.



 True kindness does not count upon nor ask about merit and gratitude but acts
from inner necessity. And such a truly kind heart finds itself rewarded in
being recognized, and thus the beneficent influence will spread unhindered.



 Nine at the top means:



 He brings increase to no one.  
Indeed, someone even strikes him.  
He does not keep his heart constantly steady.  
Misfortune.



 The meaning here is that through renunciation those in high place should
bring increase to those below. By neglecting this duty and helping no one,
they in turn lose the furhtering influence of others and soon find themselves
alone. In this way they invite attacks. An attitude not permanently in harmony
with the demands of the time will necessarily bring misfortune with it.
Confucius says about this line:



 The superior man sets his person at rest before he moves; he composes his
mind before he speaks; he makes his relations firm before he asks for
something. By attending to these three matters, the superior man gains
complete security. But if a man is brusque in his movements, others will not
cooperate. If he is agitated in his word, they awaken no echo in others. If he
asks for something without having fist established relations, it will not be
given to him. If no one is with him, those who would harm him draw near.






  
