52. Ken / Keeping Still, Mountain



 above KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN  
below KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN



 The image of this hexagram is the mountain, the youngest son of heaven and
earth. The male principle is at the top because it strives upward by nature;
the female principle is below, since the direction of its movement has come to
its normal end. In its application to man, the hexagram turns upon the problem
of achieving a quiet heart. It is very difficult to bring quiet to the heart.
While Buddhism strives for rest through an ebbing away of all movement in
nirvana, the Book of Changes holds that rest is merely a state of polarity
that always posits movement as its complement. Possibly the words of the text
embody directions for the practice of yoga.



 THE JUDGMENT



 KEEPING STILL. Keeping his back still



 So that he no longer feels his body.  
He goes into his courtyard  
And does not see his people.



 No blame.



 True quiet means keeping still when the time has come to keep still, and
going forward when the time has come to go forward. In this way rest and
movement are in agreement with the demands of the time, and thus there is
light in life. The hexagram signifies the end and the beginning of all
movement. The back is named because in the back are located all the nerve
fibers that mediate movement. If the movement of these spinal nerves is
brought to a standstill, the ego, with its restlessness, disappears as it
were. When a man has thus become calm, he may turn to the outside world. He no
longer sees in it the struggle and tumult of individual beings, and therefore
he has that true peace of mind which is needed for understanding the great
laws of the universe and for acting in harmony with them. Whoever acts from
these deep levels makes no mistakes.



 THE IMAGE



 Mountains standing close together:



 The image of KEEPING STILL.



 Thus the superior man  
Does not permit his thoughts



 To go beyond his situation.



 The heart thinks constantly. This cannot be changed, but the movements of
the heart-that is, a man's thoughts-should restrict themselves to the
immediate situation. All thinking that goes beyond this only makes the heart
sore.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Keeping his toes still.



 No blame.  
Continued perseverance furthers.



 Keeping the toes still means halting before one has even begun to move. The
beginning is the time of few mistakes. At that time one is still in harmony
with primal innocence. Not yet influenced by obscuring interests and desires,
one sees things intuitively as they really are. A man who halts at the
beginning, so long as he has not yet abandoned the truth, finds the right way.
But persisting firmness is needed to keep one from drifting irresolutely.



 Six in e second place means:



 Keeping his calves still.  
He cannot rescue him whom he follows.  
His heart is not glad.



 The leg cannot move independently; it depends on the movement of the body.
If a leg is suddenly stopped while the whole body is in vigorous motion, the
continuing body movement will make one fall. The same is true of a man who
serves a master stronger than himself. He is swept along, and even though he
may himself halt on the path of wrongdoing, he can no longer check the other
in his powerful movement. Where the master presses forward, the servant, no
matter how good his intentions, cannot save him.



 Nine in the third place means:



 Keeping his hips still.  
Making his sacrum stiff.  
Dangerous. The heart suffocates.



 This refers to enforced quiet. The restless heart is to be subdued by
forcible means. But fire when it is smothered changes into acrid smoke that
suffocates as it spreads. Therefore, in exercises in meditation and
concentration, one ought not to try to force results. Rather, calmness must
develop naturally out of a state of inner composure. If one tries to induce
calmness by means of artificial rigidity, meditation will lead to very
unwholesome results.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Keeping his trunk still.



 No blame.



 As has been pointed out above in the comment on the Judgment, keeping the
back at rest means forgetting the ego. This is the highest stage of rest. Here
this stage has not yet been reached: the individual in this instance, though
able to keep the ego, with its thoughts and impulses, in a state of rest, is
not yet quite liberated from its dominance. Nonetheless, keeping the heart at
rest is an important function, leading in the end to the complete elimination
of egotistic drives. Even though at this point one does not yet remain free
from all the dangers of doubt and unrest, this frame of mind is not a mistake,
as it leads ultimately to that other, higher level.



 Six in the fifth place means:



 Keeping his jaws still.



 The words have order.  
Remorse disappears.



 A man in a dangerous situation, especially when he is not adequate to it, is
inclined to be very free with talk and presumptuous jokes. But injudicious
speech easily leads to situations that subsequently give much cause for
regret. However, if a man is reserved in speech, his words take ever more
definite form, and every occasion for regret vanishes.  
Nine at the top means:



 Noblehearted keeping still.  
Good fortune.



 This marks the consummation of the effort to attain tranquillity. One is at
rest, not merely in a small, circumscribed way in regard to matters of detail,
but one has also a general resignation in regard to life as a whole, and this
confers peace and good fortune in relation to every individual matter.






  
