5. Hsu / Waiting (Nourishment)



 above K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER  
below CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN



 All beings have need of nourishment from above. But the gift of food comes
in its own time, and for this one must wait. This hexagram shows the clouds in
the heavens, giving rain to refresh all that grows and to provide mankind with
food and drink. The rain will come in its own time. We cannot make it come; we
have to wait for it. The idea of waiting is further suggested by the
attributes of the two trigrams--strength within, danger in from. Strength in
the face of danger does not plunge ahead but bides its time, whereas weakness
in the face of danger grows agitated and has not the patience to wait.



 THE JUDGMENT



 WAITING. If you are sincere,  
You have light and success.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.  
It furthers one to cross the great water.



 Waiting is not mere empty hoping. It has the inner certainty of reaching the
goal. Such certainty alone gives that light which leads to success. This leads
to the perseverance that brings good fortune and bestows power to cross the
great water. One is faced with a danger that has to be overcome. Weakness and
impatience can do nothing. Only a strong man can stand up to his fate, for his
inner security enables him to endure to the end. This strength shows itself in
uncompromising truthfulness [with himself]. It is only when we have the
courage to face things exactly as they are, without any sort of self-deception
or illusion, that a light will develop out of events, by which the path to
success may be recognized. This recognition must be followed by resolute and
persevering action. For only the man who goes to meet his fate resolutely is
equipped to deal with it adequately. Then he will be able to cross the great
water--that is to say, he will be capable of making the necessary decision and
of surmounting the danger.



 THE IMAGE



 Clouds rise up to heaven:  
The image of WAITING.  
Thus the superior man eats and drinks,  
Is joyous and of good cheer.



 When clouds rise in the sky, it is a sign that it will rain. There is
nothing to do but to wait until after the rain falls. It is the same in life
when destiny is at work. We should not worry and seek to shape the future by
interfering in things before the time is ripe. We should quietly fortify the
body with food and drink and the mind with gladness and good cheer. Fate comes
when it will, and thus we are ready.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Waiting in the meadow.  
IT furthers one to abide in what endures.  
No blame.



 The danger is not yet close. One is still waiting on the open plain.
Conditions are still simple, yet there is a feeling of something impending.
One must continue to lead a regular life as long as possible. Only in this way
does one guard against a premature waste of strength, keep free of blame and
error that would become a source of weakness later on.



 Nine in the second place means:



 Waiting on the sand.  
There is some gossip.  
The end brings good fortune.



 The danger gradually comes closer. Sand is near the bank of the river, and
the water means danger. Disagreements crop up. General unrest can easily
develop in such times, and we lay the blame on one another. He who stays calm
will succeed in making things go well in the end. Slander will be silenced if
we do not gratify it with injured retorts.



 Nine in the third place means:



 Waiting in the mud  
Brings about the arrival of the enemy.



 Mud is no place for waiting, since it is already being washed by the water
of the stream. Instead of having gathered strength to cross the stream at one
try, one has made a premature start that has got him no farther than the muddy
bank. Such an unfavorable position invites enemies from without, who naturally
take advantage of it. Caution and a sense of the seriousness of the situation
are all that can keep one from injury.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Waiting in blood.  
Get out of the pit.



 The situation is extremely dangerous. IT is of utmost gravity now--a matter
of life and death. Bloodshed seems imminent. There is no going forward or
backward; we are cut off as if in a pit. Now we must simply stand fast and let
fate take its course. This composure, which keeps us from aggravating the
trouble by anything we might do, is the only way of getting out of the
dangerous pit.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Waiting at meat and drink.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 Even in the midst of danger there come intervals of peace when things go
relatively well. If we possess enough inner strength, we shall take advantage
of these intervals to fortify ourselves for renewed struggle. We must know how
to enjoy the moment without being deflected from the goal, for perseverance is
needed to remain victorious. This is true in public life as well; it is not
possible to achieve everything all at once. The height of wisdom is to allow
people enough recreation to quicken pleasure in their work until the task is
completed. Herein lies the secret of the whole hexagram. It differs from Chin
OBSTRUCTION



 39, in the fact that in this instance, while waiting, we are sure of our
cause and therefore do not lose the serenity born of inner cheerfulness.



 Six at the top means:



 One falls into the pit.  
Three uninvited guests arrive.  
Honor them, and in the end there will be good fortune.  



 The waiting is over; the danger can no longer be averted. One falls into the
pit and must yield to the inevitable. Everything seems to have been in vain.
But precisely in this extremity things take an unforeseen turn. Without a move
on one's own part, there is outside intervention. At first one cannot be sure
of its meaning: is it rescue or is it destruction? A person in this situation
must keep his mind alert and not withdraw into himself with a sulky gesture of
refusal, but must greet the new turn with respect. Thus he ultimately escapes
the danger, and all goes well. Even happy turns of fortune often come in a
form that at first seems strange to us.



  
