55. Feng / Abundance [Fullness]



 above CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER  
below LI THE CLINGING, FIRE



 Chen is movement; Li is flame, whose attribute is clarity. Clarity within,
movement without-this produces greatness and abundance. The hexagram pictures
a period of advanced civilization. However, the fact that development has
reached a peak suggests that this extraordinary condition of abundance cannot
be maintained permanently.



 THE JUDGMENT



 ABUNDANCE has success.



 The king attains abundance.  
Be not sad.  
Be like the sun at midday.



 It is not given to every mortal to bring about a time of outstanding
greatness and abundance. Only a born ruler of men is able to do it, because
his will is directed to what is great. Such a time of abundance is usually
brief. Therefore a sage might well feel sad in view of the decline that must
follow. But such sadness foes not befit him. Only a man who is inwardly free
of sorrow and care can lead in a time of abundance. He must be like the sun at
midday, illuminating and gladdening everything under heaven.



 THE IMAGE



 Both thunder and lightning come:



 The image of ABUNDANCE.



 Thus the superior man decides lawsuits  
And carries out punishments.



 This hexagram has a certain connection with Shih Ho, BITING THROUGH



 21, in which thunder and lightning similarly appear together, but in the
reverse order. In BITING THROUGH, laws are laid down; here they are applied
and enforced. Clarity [Li] within makes it possible to investigate the facts
exactly, and shock [Chen] without ensures a strict and precise carrying out of
punishments.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 When a man meets his destined ruler,



 They can be together ten days,  
And it is not a mistake.  
Going meets with recognition.



 To bring about a time of abundance, a union of clarity with energetic
movement is needed. Two individuals possessed of these two attributes are
suited to each other, and even if they spend an entire cycle of time together
during the period of abundance, it will not be too long, nor is it a mistake.
Therefore one may go forth, in order to make one's influence felt; it will
meet with recognition.



 Six in the second place means:



 The curtain is of such fullness



 That the polestars can be seen at noon.



 Through going one meets with mistrust and hate.  
If one rouses him through truth,  
Good fortune comes.



 It often happens that plots and party intrigues, which have the darkening
effect of an eclipse of the sun, come between a ruler intent on great
achievement and the man who could effect great undertakings. Then, instead of
the sun, we see the northern stars in the sky. The ruler is overshadowed by a
party that has usurped power. If a man at such a time were to try to take
energetic measures, he would encounter only mistrust and envy, which would
prohibit all movement. The essential thing then is to hold inwardly to the
power of truth, which in the end is so strong that it exerts an invisible
influence on the ruler, so that all goes well.



 Nine in the third place means:



 The underbrush is of such abundance



 That the small stars can be seen at noon.  
He breaks his right arm . No blame.



 The image is that of a progressive covering over of the sun. Here the
eclipse reaches totality, therefore even the small stars can be seen at noon.
In the sphere of social relationships, this means that the prince is now so
eclipsed that even the most insignificant persons can push themselves into the
foreground. This makes it impossible for an able man, though he might be the
right hand of the ruler, to undertake anything. It is as though his arm were
broken, but he is not to blame for being thus hindered in action.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 The curtain is of such fullness



 That the polestars can be seen at noon.  
He meets his ruler, who is of like kind.  
Good fortune.



 Here the darkness is already decreasing, therefore interrelated elements
come together. Here too the complement must be found-the necessary wisdom to
complement joy of action. Then everything will go well. The complementary
factor postulated here is the reverse of the one in the first line. In the
latter, wisdom is to be complemented by energy, while here energy is
complemented by wisdom.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Lines are coming,  
Blessing and fame draw near.  
Good fortune.



 The ruler is modest and therefore open to the counsel of able men. Thus he
is surrounded by men who suggest to him the lines of action. This brings
blessing, fame, and good fortune to him and all the people.



 Six at the top means:



 His house is in a state of abundance.  
He screens off his family.  
He peers through the gate  
And no longer perceives anyone.  
For three years he sees nothing.  
Misfortune.



 This describes a man who because of his arrogance and obstinacy attains the
opposite of what he strives for. He seeks abundance and splendor for his
dwelling. He wishes at all odds to be master in his house, which so alienates
his family that in the end he finds himself completely isolated.






  
