50. Ting / The Caldron



 above LI THE CLINGING, FIRE  
below SUN THE GENTLE, WIND, WOOD



 The six lines construct the image of Ting, THE CALDRON; at the bottom are
the legs, over them the belly, then come the ears (handles), and at the top
the carrying rings. At the same time, the image suggests the idea of
nourishment. The ting, cast of bronze, was the vessel that held the cooked
viands in the temple of the ancestors and at banquets. The heads of the family
served the food from the ting into the bowls of the guests. THE WELL



 48 likewise has the secondary meaning of giving nourishment, but rather more
in relation to the people. The ting, as a utensil pertaining to a refined
civilization, suggests the fostering and nourishing of able men, which
redounded to the benefit of the state. This hexagram and THE WELL are the only
two in the Book of Changes that represent concrete, men-made objects. Yet here
too the thought has its abstract connotation. Sun, below, is wood and wind;
Li, above, is flame. Thus together they stand for the flame kindled by wood
and wind, which likewise suggests the idea of preparing food.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE CALDRON. Supreme good fortune.



 Success.



 While THE WELL relates to the social foundation of our life, and this
foundation is likened to the water that serves to nourish growing wood, the
present hexagram refers to the cultural superstructure of society. Here it is
the wood that serves as nourishment for the flame, the spirit. All that is
visible must grow beyond itself, extend into the realm of the invisible.
Thereby it receives its true consecration and clarity and takes firm root in
the cosmic order. Here we see civilization as it reaches its culmination in
religion. The ting serves in offering sacrifice to God. The highest earthly
values must be sacrificed to the divine. But the truly divine does not
manifest itself apart from man. The supreme revelation of God appears in
prophets and holy men. To venerate them is true veneration of God. The will of
God, as revealed through them, should be accepted in humility; this brings
inner enlightenment and true understanding of the world, and this leads to
great good fortune and success.



 THE IMAGE



 Fire over wood:



 The image of THE CALDRON.



 Thus the superior man consolidates his fate  
By making his position correct.



 The fate of fire depends on wood; as long as there is wood below, the fire
burns above. It is the same in human life; there is in man likewise a fate
that lends power to his life. And if he succeeds in assigning the right place
to life and to fate, thus bringing the two into harmony, he puts his fate on a
firm footing. These words contain hints about fostering of life as handed on
by oral tradition in the secret teachings of Chinese yoga.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 A ting with legs upturned.  
Furthers removal of stagnating stuff.  
One takes a concubine for the sake of her son.



 No blame.



 If a ting is turned upside down before being used, no harm is done-on the
contrary, this clears it of refuse. A concubine's position is lowly, but
because she has a son she comes to be honored. These two metaphors express the
idea that in a highly developed civilization, such as that indicated by this
hexagram, every person of good will can in some way or other succeed. No
matter how lowly he may be, provided he is ready to purify himself, he is
accepted. He attains a station in which he can prove himself fruitful in
accomplishment, and as a result he gains recognition.



 Nine in the second place means:



 There is food in the ting.  
My comrades are envious,  
But they cannot harm me.  
Good fortune.



 In a period of advanced culture, it is of the greatest importance that one
should achieve something significant. If a man concentrates on such real
undertakings, he may indeed experience envy and disfavor, but that is not
dangerous. The more he limits himself to his actual achievements, the less
harm the envious inflict on him.



 Nine in the third place means:



 The handle of the ting is altered.  
One is impeded in his way of life.



 The fat of the pheasant is not eaten.  
Once rain falls, remorse is spent.  
Good fortune comes in the end.



 The handle is the means for lifting up the ting. If the handle is altered,
the ting cannot be lifted up and used, and, sad to say, the delicious food in
it, such as pheasant fat, cannot be eaten by anyone. This describes a man who,
in a highly evolved civilization, finds himself in a place where no one
notices or recognizes him. This is a severe block to his effectiveness. All of
his good qualities and gifts of mind thus needlessly go to waste. But if he
will only see to it that he is possessed of something truly spiritual, the
time is bound to come, sooner or later, when the difficulties will be resolved
and all will go well. The fall of rain symbolizes here, as in other instances,
release of tension.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 The legs of the ting are broken.



 The prince's meal is spilled  
And his person is soiled.  
Misfortune.



 A man has a difficult and responsible task to which he is not adequate.
Moreover, he does not devote himself to it with all his strength but goes
about with inferior people; therefore the execution of the work fails. In this
way he also incurs personal opprobrium. Confucius says about this line: "Weak
character coupled with honored place, meager knowledge with large plans,
limited powers with heavy responsibility, will seldom escape disaster."  
Six in the fifth place means:



 The ting has yellow handles, golden carrying rings.  
Perseverance furthers.



 Here we have, in a ruling position, a man who is approachable and modest in
nature. As a result of this attitude he succeeds in finding strong and able
helpers who complement and aid him in his work. Having achieved this attitude,
which requires constant self-abnegation, it is important for him to hold to it
and not to let himself be led astray.  
Nine at the top means:



 The ting has rings of jade.  
Great good fortune.



 Nothing that would not act to further.



 In the preceding line the carrying rings are described as golden, to denote
their strength; here they are said to be of jade. Jade is notable for its
combination of hardness with soft luster. This counsel, in relation to the man
who is open to it, works greatly t his advantage. Here the counsel is
described in relation to the sage who imparts it. In imparting it, he will be
mild and pure, like precious jade. Thus the work finds favor in the eyes of
the Deity, who dispenses great good fortune, and becomes pleasing to men,
wherefore all goes well.






  
