54. Kuei Mei / The Marrying Maiden



 above CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER  
below TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE



 Above we have Chen, the eldest son, and below, Tui, the youngest daughter.
The man leads and the girl follows him in gladness. The picture is that of the
entrance of the girl into her husband's house. In all, there are four
hexagrams depicting the relationship between husband and wife. Hsien,
INFLUENCE,



 31, describes the attraction that a young couple have for each other; Heng,
DURATION



 32, portrays the permanent relationships of marriage; Chien, DEVELOPMENT



 53, reflects the protracted, ceremonious procedures attending THE MARRYING
MAIDEN, shows a young girl under the guidance of an older man who marries her.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE MARRYING MAIDEN.  
Undertakings bring misfortune.



 Nothing that would further.



 A girl who is taken into the family, but not as the chief wife, must behave
with special caution and reserve. She must not take it upon herself to
supplant the mistress of the house, for that would mean disorder and lead to
untenable relationships. The same is true of all voluntary relationships
between human beings. While legally regulated relationships based on personal
inclination depend in the long run entirely on tactful reserve. Affection as
the essential principle of relatedness is of the greatest importance in all
relationships in the world. For the union of heaven and earth is the origin of
the whole of nature. Among human beings likewise, spontaneous affection is the
all-inclusive principle of union.



 THE IMAGE



 Thunder over the lake:



 The image of THE MARRYING MAIDEN.



 Thus the superior man  
Understands the transitory  
In the light of the eternity of the end.



 Thunder stirs the water of the lake, which follows it in shimmering waves.
This symbolizes the girl who follows the man of her choice. But every
relationship between individuals bears within it the danger that wrong turns
may be taken, leading to endless misunderstandings and disagreements.
Therefore it is necessary constantly to remain mindful of the end. If we
permit ourselves to drift along, we come together and are parted again as the
day may determine. If on the other hand a man fixes his mind on an end that
endures, he will succeed in avoiding the reefs that confront the closer
relationships of people.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 The marrying maiden as a concubine.  
A lame man who is able to tread.  
Undertakings bring good fortune.



 The princess of ancient China maintained a fixed order of rank among the
court ladies, who were subordinated to the queen as are younger sisters to the
eldest. Frequently they came from the family of the queen, who herself led
them to her husband. The meaning is that a girl entering a family with the
consent of the wife will not rank outwardly as the equal of the latter but
will withdraw modestly into the background. However, if she understands how to
fit herself into the pattern of things, her position will be entirely
satisfactory, and she will feel sheltered in the love of the husband to whom
she bears children. The same meaning is brought out in the relationships
between officials. A man may enjoy the personal friendship of a prince and be
taken into his confidence. Outwardly this man must keep tactfully in the
background behind the official ministers of state, but, although he is
hampered by this status, as if he were lame, he can nevertheless accomplish
something through the kindliness of his nature.



 Nine in the second place means:



 A one-eyed man who is able to see.



 The perseverance of a solitary man furthers.



 Here the situation is that of a girl married to a man who has disappointed
her. Man and wife ought to work together like a pair of eyes. Here the girl is
left behind in loneliness; the man of her choice either has become unfaithful
or has died. But she does not lost the inner light of loyalty. Thought the
other eye is gone, she maintains her loyalty even in loneliness.



 Six in the third place means:



 The marrying maiden as a slave.



 She marries as a concubine.



 A girl who is in a lowly position and finds no husband may, in some
circumstances, still win shelter as a concubine. This pictures the situation
of a person who longs too much for joys that cannot be obtained in the usual
way. He enters upon a situation not altogether compatible with self-esteem.
Neither judgment nor warning is added to this line; it merely lays bare the
actual situation, so that everyone may draw a lesson from it.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 The marrying maiden draws out the allotted time.  
A late marriage comes in due course.



 The girl is virtuous. She does not wish to throw herself away, and allows
the customary time for marriage to slip by. However, there is no harm in this;
she is rewarded for her purity and, even though belatedly, finds the husband
intended for her.



  
Six in the fifth place means:



 The sovereign I gave his daughter in marriage.



 The embroidered garments of the princess  
Were not as gorgeous  
As those of the serving maid.



 The moon that is nearly full  
Brings good fortune.



 The sovereign I is T'ang the Completer. This ruler decreed that the imperial
princesses should be subordinated to their husbands in the same manner as
other women (cf. Hexagram



 11, six in the fifth place). The emperor does not wait for a suitor to woo
his daughter but gives her in marriage when he sees fit. Therefore it is in
accord with custom for the girl's family to take the initiative here. We see
here a girl of aristocratic birth who marries a man of modest circumstances
and understands how to adapt herself with grace to the new situation. She is
free of all vanity of outer adornment, and forgetting her rank in her
marriage, takes a place below that of her husband, just as the moon, before it
is quite full, does not directly face the sun.



 Six at the top means:



 The woman holds the basket, but there are no fruits in it.



 The man stabs the sheep, but no blood flows.



 Nothing that acts to further.



 At the sacrifice to the ancestors, the woman had to present harvest
offerings in a basket, while the man slaughtered the sacrificial animal with
his own hand. Here the ritual is only superficially fulfilled; the woman takes
an empty basket and the man stabs a sheep slaughtered beforehand-solely to
preserve the forms. This impious, irreverent attitude bodes no good for a
marriage.






  
