59. Huan / Dispersion [Dissolution]



 above SUN THE GENTLE, WIND  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 Wind blowing over water disperses it, dissolving it into foam and mist. This
suggests that when a man's vital energy is dammed up within him (indicated as
a danger by the attribute of the lower trigram), gentleness serves to break up
and dissolve the blockage.



 THE JUDGMENT



 DISPERSION. Success.



 The king approaches his temple.  
It furthers one to cross the great water.  
Perseverance furthers.



 The text of this hexagram resembles that of Ts'ui, GATHERING TOGETHER



 45. In the latter, the subject is the bringing together of elements that
have been separated, as water collects in lakes upon the earth. Here the
subject is the dispersing and dissolving of divisive egotism. DISPERSION shows
the way, so to speak, that leads to gathering together. This explains the
similarity of the two texts. Religious forces are needed to overcome the
egotism that divides men. The common celebration of the great sacrificial
feasts and sacred rites, which gave expression simultaneously to the
interrelation and social articulation of the family and state, was the means
of employed by the great ruler to unite men. The sacred music and the splendor
of the ceremonies aroused a strong tide of emotion that was shared by all
hearts in unison, and that awakened a consciousness of the common origin of
all creatures. In this way disunity was overcome and rigidity dissolved. A
further means to the same end is co-operation in great general undertakings
that set a high goal for the will of the people; in the common concentration
on this goal, all barriers dissolve, just as, when a boat is crossing a great
stream, all hands must unite in a joint task. But only a man who is himself
free of all selfish ulterior considerations, and who perseveres in justice and
steadfastness, is capable of so dissolving the hardness of egotism.



 THE IMAGE



 The wind drives over the water:



 The image of DISPERSION.



 Thus the kings of old sacrificed to the Lord  
And built temples.



 In the autumn and winter, water begins to freeze into ice. When the warm
breezes of spring come, the rigidity is dissolved, and the elements that have
been dispersed in ice floes are reunited. It is the same with the minds of the
people. Through hardness and selfishness the heart grows rigid, and this
rigidity leads to separation from all others. Egotism and cupidity isolate
men. Therefore the hearts of men must be seized by a devout emotion. They must
be shaken by a religious awe in face of eternity-stirred with an intuition of
the One Creator of all living beings, and united through the strong feeling of
fellowship experienced in the ritual of divine worship.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 He brings help with the strength of a horse.  
Good fortune.



 It is important that disunion should be overcome at the outset, before it
has become complete-that the clouds should be dispersed before they have
brought storm and rain. At such times when hidden divergences in temper make
themselves felt and lead to mutual misunderstandings we must take quick and
vigorous action to dissolve the misunderstandings and mutual distrust.



 Nine in the second place means:



 At the dissolution  
He hurries to that which supports him.  
Remorse disappears.



 When an individual discovers within himself the beginnings of alienation
from others, of misanthropy and ill humor, he must set about dissolving these
obstructions. He must rouse himself inwardly, hasten to that which supports
him. Such support is never found in hatred, but always in a moderate and just
judgment of men, linked with good will. If he regains this unobstructed
outlook on humanity, while at the same time all saturnine ill humor is
dissolved, all occasion for remorse disappears.



 Six in the third place means:



 He dissolves his self. No remorse.



 Under certain circumstances, a man's work may become so difficult that he
can no longer think of himself. He must set aside all personal desires and
disperse whatever the self gathers about it to serve as a barrier against
others. Only on the basis of great renunciation can he obtain the strength for
great achievements. By setting his goal in a great task outside himself, he
can attain this standpoint.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 He dissolves his bond with his group.



 Supreme good fortune.  
Dispersion leads in turn to accumulation.



 This is something that ordinary men do not think of.



 When we are working at a task that affects the general welfare, we must
leave all private friendships out of account. Only by rising above party
interests can we achieve something decisive. He who has the courage thus to
forego what is near wins what is afar. But in order to comprehend this
standpoint, one must have a wide view of the interrelationships of life, such
as only unusual men attain.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 His loud cries are as dissolving as sweat.  
Dissolution! A king abides without blame.



 In times of general dispersion and separation, a great idea provides a focal
point for the organization of recovery. Just as an illness reaches its crisis
in a dissolving sweat, so a great stimulating idea is a true salvation in
times of general deadlock. It gives the people a rallying point-a man in a
ruling position who can dispel misunderstandings.



 Nine at the top means:



 He dissolves his blood.  
Departing, keeping at a distance, going out,  
Is without blame.



 The idea of the dissolving of a man's blood means the dispersion of that
which might lead to bloodshed and wounds, i.e., avoidance of danger. But here
the thought is not that a man avoids difficulties for himself alone, but
rather that he rescues his kin-helps them to get away before danger comes, or
to keep at a distance from an existing danger, or to find a way out of a
danger that is already upon them. In this way he does what is right.






  
