60. Chieh / Limitation



 above K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER  
below TUI THE JOYOUS, LAKE



 A lake occupies a limited space. When more water comes into it, it
overflows. Therefore limits must be set for the water. The image shows water
below and water above, with the firmament between them as a limit. The Chinese
word for limitation really denotes the joints that divide a bamboo stalk. In
relation to ordinary life it means the thrift that sets fixed limits upon
expenditures. In relation to the moral sphere it means the fixed limits that
the superior man sets upon his actions-the limits of loyalty and
disinterestedness.



 THE JUDGMENT



 LIMITATION. Success.  
Galling limitation must not be persevered in.



 Limitations are troublesome, but they are effective. If we live economically
in normal times, we are prepared for times of want. To be sparing saves us
from humiliation. Limitations are also indispensable in the regulation of
world conditions. In nature there are fixed limits for summer and winter, day
and night, and these limits give the year its meaning. In the same way,
economy, by setting fixed limits upon expenditures, acts to preserve property
and prevent injury to the people. But in limitation we must observe due
measure. If a man should seek to impose galling limitations upon his own
nature, it would be injurious. And if he should go too far in imposing
limitations on others, they would rebel. Therefore it is necessary to set
limits even upon limitation.



 THE IMAGE



 Water over lake: the image of LIMITATION.



 Thus the superior man  
Creates number and measure,  
And examines the nature of virtue and correct conduct.



 A lake is something limited. Water is inexhaustible. A lake can contain only
a definite amount of the infinite quantity of water; this is its peculiarity.
In human life too the individual achieves significance through discrimination
and the setting of limits. Therefore what concerns us here is the problem of
clearly defining these discriminations, which are, so to speak, the backbone
of morality. Unlimited possibilities are not suited to man; if they existed,
his life would only dissolve in the boundless. To become strong, a man's life
needs the limitations ordained by duty and voluntarily accepted. The
individual attains significance as a free spirit only by surrounding himself
with these limitations and by determining for himself what his duty is.



 THE LINES



 Nine at the beginning means:



 Not going out of the door and the courtyard  
Is without blame.



 Often a man who would like to undertake something finds himself confronted
by insurmountable limitations. Then he must know where to stop. If he rightly
understands this and does not go beyond the limits set for him, he accumulates
an energy that enables him, when the proper time comes, to act with great
force. Discretion is of prime importance in preparing the way for momentous
things. Concerning this, Confucius says:



 Where disorder develops, words are the first steps. If the prince is not
discreet, he loses his servant. If the servant is not discreet he loses his
life. If germinating things are not handled with discretion, the perfecting of
them is impeded. Therefore the superior man is careful to maintain silence and
does not go forth.



 Nine in the second place means:



 Not going out of the gate and the courtyard  
Brings misfortune.



 When the time for action has come, the moment must be quickly seized. Just
as water first collects in a lake without flowing out, yet is certain to find
an outlet when the lake is full, so it is in the life of man. It is a good
thing to hesitate so long as the time for action has not come, but no longer.
Once the obstacles to action have been removed, anxious hesitation is a
mistake that is bound to bring disaster, because one misses one's opportunity.



 Six in the third place means:



 He who knows limitation  
Will have cause to lament.



 No blame.



 If an individual is bent only on pleasures and enjoyment, it is easy for him
to lose his sense of the limits that are necessary. If he gives himself over
to extravagance, he will have to suffer the consequences, with accompanying
regret. He must not seek to lay the blame on others. Only when we realize that
our mistakes are of our own making will such disagreeable experiences free us
of errors.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Contented limitation. Success.



 Every limitation has its value, but a limitation that requires persistent
effort entails a cost of too much energy. When, however, the limitation is a
natural one (as for example, the limitation by which water flows only
downhill), it necessarily leads to success, for then it means a saving of
energy. The energy that otherwise would be consumed in a vain struggle with
the object, is applied wholly to the benefit of the matter in hand, and
success is assured.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Sweet limitation brings good fortune.  
Going brings esteem.  



 The limitation must be carried out in the right way if it is to be
effective. If we seek to impose restrictions on others only, while evading
them ourselves, these restrictions will always be resented and will provoke
resistance. If, however, a man in a leading position applies the limitation
first to himself, demanding little from those associated with him, and with
modest means manages to achieve something, good fortune is the result. Where
such an example occurs, it meets with emulation, so that whatever is
undertaken must succeed.



 Six at the top means:



 Galling limitation.  
Perseverance brings misfortune.  
Remorse disappears.



 If one is too severe in setting up restrictions, people will not endure
them. The more consistent such severity, the worse it is, for in the long run
a reaction is unavoidable. In the same way, the tormented body will rebel
against excessive asceticism. On the other hand, although ruthless severity is
not to be applied persistently and systematically, there may be times when it
si the only means of safeguarding against guilt and remorse. In such
situations ruthlessness toward oneself is the only means of saving one's soul,
which otherwise would succumb to irresolution and temptation.






  
