62. Hsiao Kuo / Preponderance of the Small



 above CHeN THE AROUSING, THUNDER  
below KeN KEEPING STILL, MOUNTAIN



 While in the hexagram Ta Kuo, PREPONDERANCE OF THE GREAT



 28, the strong lines preponderate and are within, inclosed between weak
lines at the top and bottom, the present hexagram has weak lines
preponderating, though here again they are on the outside, the strong lines
being within. This indeed is the basis of the exceptional situation indicated
by the hexagram. When strong lines are outside, we have the hexagram I,
PROVIDING NOURISHMENT



 27, or Chung Fu, INNER TRUTH,



 61; neither represents and exceptional state. When strong elements within
preponderate, they necessarily enforce their will. This creates struggle and
exceptional conditions in general. But in the present hexagram it is the weak
element that perforce must mediate with the outside world. If a man occupies a
position of authority for which he is by nature really inadequate,
extraordinary prudence is necessary.



 THE JUDGMENT



 PREPONDERANCE OF THE SMALL. Success.  
Perseverance furthers.



 Small things may be done; great things should not be done.



 The flying bird brings the message:  
It is not well to strive upward,  
It is well to remain below.  
Great good fortune.



 Exceptional modesty and conscientiousness are sure to be rewarded with
success; however, if a man is not to throw himself away, it is important that
they should not become empty form and subservience but be combined always with
a correct dignity in personal behavior. We must understand the demands of the
time in order to find the necessary offset for its deficiencies and damages.
In any event we must not count on great success, since the requisite strength
is lacking. In this lies the importance of the message that one should not
strive after lofty things but hold to lowly things. The structure of the
hexagram gives rise to the idea that this message is brought by a bird. In Ta
Kuo, PREPONDERANCE OF THE GREAT



 28, the four strong, heavy lines within, supported only by two weak lines
without, give the image of a sagging ridgepole. Here the supporting weak lines
are both outside and preponderant; this gives the image of a soaring bird. But
a bird should not try to surpass itself and fly into the sun; it should
descend to the earth, where its nest is. In this way it gives the message
conveyed by the hexagram.



 THE IMAGE



 Thunder on the mountain:



 The image of PREPONDERANCE OF THE SMALL.



 Thus in his conduct the superior man gives preponderance to reverence.  
In bereavement he gives preponderance to grief.  
In his expenditures he gives preponderance to thrift.



 Thunder on the mountain is different from thunder on the plain. In the
mountains, thunder seems much nearer; outside the mountains, it is less
audible than the thunder of an ordinary storm. Thus the superior man derives
an imperative from this image: he must always fix his eyes more closely and
more directly on duty than does the ordinary man, even though this might make
his behavior seem petty to the outside world. He is exceptionally
conscientious in his actions. In bereavement emotion means more to him than
ceremoniousness. In all his personal expenditures he is extremely simple and
unpretentious. In comparison with the man of the masses, all this makes him
stand out as exceptional. But the essential significance of his attitude lies
in the fact that in external matters he is on the side of the lowly.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 The bird meets with misfortune through flying.



 A bird ought to remain in the nest until it is fledged. If it tries to fly
before this, it invites misfortune. Extraordinary measures should be resorted
to only when all else fails. At first we ought to put up with traditional ways
as long as possible; otherwise we exhaust ourselves and our energy and still
achieve nothing.  
Six in the second place means:



 She passes by her ancestor  
And meets her ancestress.  
He does not reach his prince  
And meets the official.



 No blame.



 Two exceptional situations are instanced here. In the temple of ancestors,
where alternation of generations prevails, the grandson stands on the same
side as the grandfather. Hence his closest relations are with the grandfather.
The present line designates the grandson's wife, who during the sacrifice
passes by the ancestor and goes toward the ancestress. This unusual behavior
is, however, an expression of her modesty. She ventures rather to approach the
ancestress, for she feels related to her by their common sex. Hence here
deviation from the rule is not a mistake. Another image is that of the
official who, in compliance with regulation, first seeks an audience with his
prince. If he is not successful in this, he does not try to force anything but
goes about conscientious fulfillment of his duty, taking his place among the
other officials. This extraordinary restraint is likewise not a mistake in
exceptional times. (The rule is that every official should first have an
audience with the prince by whom he is appointed. Here the appointment is made
by the minister.)



 Nine in the third place means:



 If one is not extremely careful,



 Somebody may come up from behind and strike him.  
Misfortune.



 At certain times extraordinary caution is absolutely necessary. But it is
just in such life situations that we find upright and strong personalities
who, conscious of being in the right, disdain to hold themselves on guard,
because they consider it petty. Instead, they go their way proud and
unconcerned. But this self-confidence deludes them. There are dangers lurking
for which they are unprepared. Yet such danger is not unavoidable; one can
escape it if he understands that the time demands that he pay especial
attention to small and insignificant thing.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 No blame. He meets him without passing by.  
Going brings danger. One must be on guard.  
Do not act. Be constantly persevering.



 Hardness of character is tempered by yielding position so that no mistakes
are made. The situation here calls for extreme caution; one must make no
attempt of one's own initiative to reach the desired end. And if one were to
go on, endeavoring one must be on guard and not act but continue inwardly to
persevere.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 Dense clouds,



 No rain from our western territory.



 The prince shoots and hits him who is in the cave.



 As a high place is pictured here, the image of a flying bird has become that
of flying clouds. But dense as the clouds are, they race across the sky and
give no rain. Similarly, in exceptional times there may be a born ruler who is
qualified to set the world in order, but who cannot achieve anything or confer
blessing on the people because he stands alone and has no helpers. Is such
times a man must seek out helpers with whose aid he can carry out the task.
But these helpers must be modestly sought out in the retirement to which they
have withdrawn. It is not in the fame nor their great names but their genuine
achievements that are important. Through such modesty the right man is found,
and the exceptional task is carried out in spite of all difficulties.



 Six at the top means:



 He passes him by, not meeting him.



 The flying bird leaves him.  
Misfortune.



 This means bad luck and injury.



 If one overshoots the goal, one cannot hit it. If a bird will not come to
its nest but flies higher and higher, it eventually falls into the hunter's
net. He who in times of extraordinary salience of small things does not know
how to call a halt, but restlessly seeks to press on and on, draws upon
himself misfortune at the hands of gods and men, because he deviates from the
order of nature.






  
