6. Sung / Conflict



 above CH'IEN THE CREATIVE, HEAVEN  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 The upper trigram, whose image is heaven, has an upward movement; the lower
trigram, water, in accordance with its nature tends downward. Thus the two
halves move away from each other, giving rise to the idea of conflict. The
attribute of the Creative is strength, that of the Abysmal is danger, guile.
Where cunning has force before it, there is conflict. A third indication of
conflict, in terms of character, is presented by the combination of deep
cunning within and fixed determination outwardly. A person of this character
will certainly be quarrelsome.



 THE JUDGMENT



 CONFLICT. You are sincere  
And are being obstructed.  
A cautious halt halfway brings good fortune.  
Going through to the end brings misfortune.  
It furthers one to see the great man.  
It does not further one to cross the great water.



 Conflict develops when one feels himself to be in the right and runs into
opposition. If one is not convinced of being in the right, opposition leads to
craftiness or high-handed encroachment but not to open conflict. If a man is
entangled in a conflict, his only salvation lies in being so clear-headed and
inwardly strong that he is always ready to come to terms by meeting the
opponent halfway. To carry one the conflict to the bitter end has evil effects
even when one is the right, because the enmity is then perpetuated. It is
important to see the great man, that is, an impartial man whose authority is
great enough to terminate the conflict amicably or assure a just decision. In
times of strife, crossing the great water is to be avoided, that is, dangerous
enterprises are not to be begun, because in order to be successful they
require concerted unity of focus. Conflict within weakens the power to conquer
danger without.



 THE IMAGE



 Heaven and water go their opposite ways:  
The image of CONFLICT.  
Thus in all his transactions the superior man  
Carefully considers the beginning.



 The image indicates that the causes of conflict are latent in the opposing
tendencies of the two trig rams. Once these opposing tendencies appear,
conflict is inevitable. To avoid it, therefore, everything must be taken
carefully into consideration in the very beginning. If rights and duties are
exactly defined, or if, in a group, the spiritual trends of the individuals
harmonize, the cause of conflict is removed in advance.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 If one does not perpetuate the affair,  
There is a little gossip.  
In the end, good fortune comes.



 While a conflict is in the incipient stage, the best thing To do is to drop
the issue. Especially when the adversary is stronger, it is not advisable to
risk pushing the conflict to a decision. It may come to a slight dispute, but
in the end all goes well.



 Nine in the second place means:



 One cannot engage in conflict;  
One returns home, gives way.  
The people of his town,  
Three hundred households,  
Remain free of guilt.



 In a struggle with an enemy of superior strength, retreat is no disgrace.
Timely withdrawal prevents bad consequences. If, out of a false sense of
honor, a man allowed himself to be tempted into an unequal conflict, he would
be drawing down disaster upon himself. In such a case a wise and conciliatory
attitude benefits the whole community, which will then not be drawn into the
conflict.



 Six in the third place means:



 To nourish oneself on ancient virtue induces perseverance.  
Danger. In the end, good fortune comes.  
If by chance you are in the service of a king,  
Seek not works.



 This is a warning of the danger that goes with an expansive disposition.
Only that which has been honestly acquired through merit remains a permanent
possession. It can happen that such a possession may be contested, but since
it is really one's own, one cannot be robbed of it. Whatever a man possesses
through the strength of his own nature cannot be lost. If one enters the
service of a superior, one can avoid conflict only by not seeking works for
the sake of prestige. It is enough if the work is done: let the honor go to
the other.



 Nine in the fourth place means:



 One cannot engage in conflict.  
One turns back and submits to fate,  
Changes one's attitude,  
And finds peace in perseverance.  
Good fortune.



 This refers to a person whose inner attitude at first lacks peace. He does
not feel content with his situation and would like to improve it through
conflict. In contrast tot the situation of the nine in the second place, he is
dealing with a weaker opponent and might therefore succeed. But he cannot
carry on the fight, because, since right is not on his side, he cannot justify
the conflict to his conscience. Therefore he turns back and accepts his fate.
He changes his mind and finds lasting peace in being at one with eternal law.
This brings good fortune.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 To contend before him  
Brings supreme good fortune.



 This refers to an arbiter in a conflict who is powerful and just, and strong
enough to lend weight to the right side. A dispute can be turned over to him
with confidence. If one is in the right, one attains great good fortune.



 Nine at the top means:



 Even if by chance a leather belt is bestowed on one,'  
By the end of a morning  
It will have been snatched away three times.



 Here we have someone who has carried a conflict to the bitter end and has
triumphed. He is granted a decoration, but his happiness does not last. He is
attacked again and again, and the result is conflict without end.






  
