7. Shih / The Army



 above K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH  
below K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER



 This hexagram is made up of the trigrams K'an, water, and K'un, earth, and
thus it symbolizes the ground water stored up in the earth. In the same way
military strength is stored up in the mass of the people--invisible in times
of peace but always ready for use as a source of power. The attributes of the
two trig rams are danger inside and obedience must prevail outside. Of the
individual lines, the one that controls the hexagram is the strong nine in the
second place, to which the other lines, all yielding, are subordinate. This
line indicates a commander, because it stands in the middle of one of the two
trigrams. But since it is in the lower rather than the upper trigram, it
represents not the ruler but the efficient general, who maintains obedience in
the army by his authority.



 THE JUDGMENT



 THE ARMY. The army needs perseverance  
And a strong man.  
Good fortune without blame.



 An army is a mass that needs organization in order to become a fighting
force.  
Without strict discipline nothing can be accomplished, but this discipline
must not be achieved by force. It requires a strong man who captures the
hearts of the people and awakens their enthusiasm. In order that he may
develop his abilities he needs the complete confidence of his ruler, who must
entrust him with full responsibility as long as the war lasts. But war is
always a dangerous thing and brings with it destruction and devastation.
Therefore it should not be resorted to rashly but, like a poisonous drug,
should be used as a last recourse.



 THE IMAGE



 In the middle of the earth is water:  
The image of THE ARMY.



 Thus the superior man increases his masses  
By generosity toward the people.



 Ground water is invisibly present within the earth. In the same way the
military power of a people is invisibly present in the masses. When danger
threatens, every peasant becomes present in the masses. When danger threatens,
every peasant becomes a soldier; when the war ends, he goes back to his plow.
He who is generous toward the people wins their love, and a people living
under a mild rule becomes strong and powerful. Only a people economically
strong can be important in military power. Such power must therefore be
cultivated by improving the economic condition of the people and by humane
government. Only when there is this invisible bond between government and
people, so that the people are sheltered by their government as ground water
is sheltered by the earth, is it possible to wage a victorious war.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 An army must set forth in proper order.  
If the order is not good, misfortune threatens.



 At the beginning of a military enterprise, order is imperative. A just and
valid cause must exist, and the obedience and coordination of the troops must
be well organized, otherwise the result is inevitably failure.



 Nine in the second place means:



 In the midst of the army.  
Good fortune. No blame.  
The king bestows a triple decoration.



 The leader should be in the midst of his army, in touch with it, sharing
good and bad with the masses he leads. This alone makes him equal to the heavy
demands made upon him. He needs also the recognition of the ruler. The
decorations he receives are justified, because there is no question of
personal preferment here: the whole army, whose center he is, is honored in
his person.



 Six in the third place means:



 Perchance the army carries corpses in the wagon.  
Misfortune.



 Here we have a choice of two explanations. One points to defeat because
someone other than the chosen leader interferes with the command; the other is
similar in its general meaning, but the expression, "carries corpses in the
wagon," is interpreted differently. At burials and at sacrifices to the dead
it was customary in China for the deceased to whom the sacrifice was made to
be represented by a boy of the family, who sat in the dead man's place and was
honored as his representative. On the basis of this custom the text is
interpreted as meaning that a "corpse boy" is sitting in the wagon, or, in
other words, that authority is not being exercised by the proper leaders but
has been usurped by others. Perhaps the whole difficulty clears up if it is
inferred that there has been an error in copying. The character fan, meaning
"all," may have been misread as shih, which means "corpse." Allowing for this
error, the meaning would be that if the multitude assumes leadership of the
army (rides in the wagon), misfortune will ensue.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 The army retreats. No blame.



 In the face of a superior enemy, with whom it would be hopeless to engage in
battle, an orderly retreat is the only correct procedure, because it will save
the army from defeat and disintegration. It is by no means a sign of courage
or strength to insist upon engaging in a hopeless struggle regardless of
circumstances.  
Six in the fifth place means:



 There is game in the field.  
It furthers one to catch it.  
Without blame.  
Let the eldest lead the army.  
The younger transports corpses;  
Then perseverance brings misfortune.



 Game is in the field--it has left its usual haunts in the forest and is
devastating the fields. This points to an enemy invasion. Energetic combat and
punishment are here thoroughly justified, but they must not degenerate into a
wild melee in which everyone fends for himself. Despite the greatest degree of
perseverance and bravery, this would lead to misfortune. The army must be
directed by an experienced leader. It is a matter of waging war, not of
permitting the mob to slaughter all who fall into their hands; if they do,
defeat will be the result, and despite all perseverance there is danger of
misfortune.



 Six at the top means:



 The great prince issues commands,  
Founds states, vests families with fiefs.  
Inferior people should not be employed.



 The war has ended successfully, victory is won, and the king divided estates
and fiefs among his faithful vassals. But it is important that inferior people
should not come into power. If they have helped, let them be paid off with
money, but they should not be awarded lands or the privileges of rulers, lest
power be abused.
