8. Pi / Holding Together [union]



 above K'AN THE ABYSMAL, WATER  
below K'UN THE RECEPTIVE, EARTH



 The waters on the surface of the earth flow together wherever they can, as
for example in the ocean, where all the rivers come together. Symbolically
this connotes holding together and the laws that regulate it. The same idea is
suggested by the fact that all the lines of the hexagram except the fifth, the
place of the ruler, are yielding. The yielding lines hold together because
they are influenced by a man of strong will in the leading position, a man who
is their center of union. Moreover, this strong and guiding personality in
turn holds together with the others, finding in them the complement of his own
nature.



 THE JUDGMENT



 HOLDING TOGETHER brings good fortune.  
Inquire of the oracle once again  
Whether you possess sublimity, constancy, and perseverance;  
Then there is no blame.



 Those who are uncertain gradually join.  
Whoever come too late  
Meets with misfortune.



 What is required is that we unite with others, in order that all may
complement and aid one another through holding together. But such holding
together calls for a central figure around whom other persons may unite. To
become a center of influence holding people together is a grave matter and
fraught with great responsibility. It requires greatness of spirit,
consistency, and strength. Therefore let him who wishes to gather others about
him ask himself whether he is equal to the undertaking, for anyone attempting
the task without a real calling for it only makes confusion worse than if no
union at all had taken place. But when there is a real rallying point, those
who at first are hesitant or uncertain gradually come in of their own accord.
Late-comers must suffer the consequences, for in holding together the question
of the right time is also important. Relationships are formed and firmly
established according to definite inner laws. Common experiences strengthen
these ties, and he who comes too late to share in these basic experiences must
suffer for it if, as a straggler, he finds the door locked. If a man has
recognized the necessity for union and does not feel strong enough to function
as the center, it is his duty to become a member of some other organic
fellowship.



 THE IMAGE



 On the earth is water:  
The image of HOLDING TOGETHER.



 Thus the kings of antiquity  
Bestowed the different states as fiefs  
And cultivated friendly relations  
With the feudal lords.



 Water fills up all the empty places on the earth and clings fast to it. The
social organization of ancient China was based on this principle of the
holding together of dependents and rulers. Water flows to unite with water,
because all parts of it are subject to the same laws. So too should human
society hold together through a community of interests that allows each
individual to feel himself a member of a whole. The central power of a social
organization must see to it that every member finds that his true interest
lies in holding together with it, as was the case in the paternal relationship
between king and vassals in ancient China.



 THE LINES



 Six at the beginning means:



 Hold to him in truth and loyalty;  
This is without blame.  
Truth, like a full earthen bowl"  
Thus in the end  
Good fortune comes from without.



 Fundamental sincerity is the only proper basis for forming relationships.
This attitude, symbolized by a full earthen bowl, in which the content is
everything and the empty form nothing, shows itself not in clever words but
through the strength of what lies within the speaker. This strength is so
great that it has power to attract good fortune to itself from without.



 Six in the second place means:



 Hold to him inwardly.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.  



 If a person responds perseveringly and in the right way to the behests from
above that summon him to action, his relations with others are intrinsic and
he does not lose himself. But if a man seeks association with others as if he
were an obsequious office hunter, he throws himself away. He does not follow
the path of the superior man, who never loses his dignity.



 Six in the third place means:



 You hold together with the wrong people.



 We are often among people who do not belong to our own sphere. In that case
we must beware of being drawn into false intimacy through force of habit.
Needless to say, this would have evil consequences. Maintaining sociability
without intimacy is the only right attitude toward people, because otherwise
we should not be free to enter into relationship with people of our own kind
later on.



 Six in the fourth place means:



 Hold to him outwardly also.  
Perseverance brings good fortune.



 Here the relations with a man who is the center of union are well
established. Then we may, and indeed we should, show our attachment openly.
But we must remain constant and not allow ourselves to be led astray.  
Nine in the fifth place means:



 Manifestation of holding together.  
In the hunt the king uses beaters on three sides only  
And forgoes game that runs off in front.  
The citizens need no warning.  
Good fortune.  



 In the royal hunts of ancient China it was customary to drive up the game
from three sides, but on the fourth the animals had a chance to run off. If
they failed to do this they had to pass through a gate behind which the king
stood ready to shoot. Only animals that entered here were shot; those that ran
off in front were permitted to escape. This custom accorded with a kingly
attitude; the royal hunter did not wish to turn the chase into a slaughter,
but held that the kill should consist only of those animals which had so to
speak voluntarily exposed themselves. There is depicted here a ruler, or
influential man, to whom people are attracted. Those who come to him he
accepts, those who do not come are allowed to go their own way. He invited
none, flatters none--all come of their own free will. In this way there
develops a voluntary dependence among those who hold him. They do not have to
be constantly on their guard but may express their opinions openly. Police
measures are not necessary, and they cleave to their ruler of their own
volition. The same principle of freedom is valid for life in general. We
should not woo favor from people. If a man cultivates within himself the
purity and the strength that are necessary for one who is the center of a
fellowship, those who are meant for him come of their own accord.



 Six at the top means:



 He finds no head for holding together.  
Misfortune.  



 The head is the beginning. If the beginning is not right, there is no hope
of a right ending. If we have missed the right moment for union and go on
hesitating to give complete and full devotion, we shall regret the error when
it is too late.






  
